AITA for showing my husband the text his mom sent me and causing her to be disowned?
AITA for “kidnapping” my baby, causing my husband to have a panic attack
AITA for yelling at my boyfriend for making me leave my best friend's wedding?
AITA for not telling my Dad he isn't getting the inheritance he's expecting?
AITA for calling my hot-tempered guy coworker "emotional" to embarrass him into calming tf down?
AITA for getting upset that my sister’s fiancé pulled me aside and patted me down at their wedding?
AITA for turning the home I inherited into an Airbnb? My sister thought it would be a “family home” forever.
AITA for telling my family to stop celebrating?
UPDATE: AITA for making a dad joke?
WIBTA for refusing to stop cooking bacon in my kitchen due to my teenage daughters vegan lifestyle?
AITA for watching and not doing anything while my wife was being kicked out of my company?
AITA for telling my estranged sister and our parents that she and her kids are not my problem?
AITA - Telling my parents to pay me back my college tuition if they want a relationship
AITA for banning alcohol from Christmas.
UPDATE AITA for kicking my brother and his family out after his son stole my engagement ring?
AITA for sending an invoice to my wife's cousin after she "didn't have space for us" at her wedding?
AITAH I took $2,000 to get off the plane and came home late
AITA for telling the teacher to stop making comments on my wheelchair?
AITA for not letting my niece host her wedding at my "castle"?
UPDATE: AITA for not giving my friend's dog back unless she pays me for it?
AITA for begging my girlfriend to uphold a sexist tradition just so she can make a good first impression?
AITA for exposing my ex to his mother about our kids?
AITA for telling my husband he “should have just married a white woman”
AITA for telling everyone exactly why I'm getting divorced?
AITA for having my daughter write a 'morbid' school family tree project?
AITA...For telling my wife "I warned you" when our son got a lock for his room?
AITA for not including my SIL in photos during my bachelorette party because she wore white?
AITA for not giving my brother(and wife) the bigger room?
AITA for tricking my in-laws into trying my food?
AITA for not treating my wife like an equal parent by telling her she has no say in the way I bond with my son and also calling her homophobic?
AITA for reporting my car stolen when my sister took it after I told her not to?
AITA for having pot cookies out in the open in my own home?
AITA for celebrating my anniversary despite what happened at my wedding?
AITA for refusing my to buy my fiancé gaming laptop for a few grand after he told me to find a real job?
AITA for cancelling the entire vacation when I found out that my stepdaughters deliberately hid my daughter's passport to get her to stay home?
AITA for not punishing my child after he corrected the teacher?
AITA for calling my body-positive co-worker "unhealthy, deluded, and bitter" after some rude comments she made about me?
AITA for asking my parents for their entire estate if they want me to be my sister's guardian.
AITA For my reaction when I got home and found my 6 months old daughter wearing the same diaper for 9 hours?
UPDATE: AITA if I "cancel" Christmas because I can't afford it this year?
AITA for spiking my leftovers with Ghost Pepper flakes to teach my brother a lesson
AITA for moving my son into a rental apartment after finding out that his dad's been cancelling his job applications?
AITA for going home after I overheard my husband say he didn't want to bring me with him to his family vacation?
AITA For Refusing To Crochet Something For My Brother's Future Baby After Years Of Teasing?
AITA for outing my ex as gay after she told everyone that I cheated on her?
AITA for evicting a tenant because they got pregnant?
AITA For not being happy that my sister is pregnant AGAIN?
UPDATE AITA For telling my wife her parents are not allowed to watch our son ever again
AITA for kicking my boyfriend's parents out of our apartment after his mom called me a bitch?
AITA? For cutting my niece off college fund because of what she said about me.
AITA for demanding my girlfriend tells me her author’s pen name?
AITA for putting bacon on my lunch to keep my Muslim friend from stealing it
AITA for calling my coworker a "nosy b*tch" after she kept insisting to know my husband's salary?
AITA for installing a lock on the bathroom door after my BIL kept barging in?
AITA for not helping my son and his wife with my grandson?
UPDATE to AITA for demanding the same Christmas present my stepbrother got?
AITA for refusing to let my future husband lie about the house he and I purchased during his 'groom speech'?
AITA for blowing up at my stepsister at her comments about my lost weight?
AITA for insisting if I can't have my partner over, neither can anyone else?
AITA for using my friends "logic" against her and making her cry
AITA for keeping a $300000 prize to myself when I originally planned to share it with my boyfriend?
AITA for calling a woman an idiot when she refused listen to why my daughter isn't vaccinated?
AITA for saying things my wife gives our infant in front of our child’s doctor?
AITA for not answering work emails while on vacation resulting in the loss of a client?
AITA for telling my friend to find her own hobbies and interests instead of just copying whatever her current boyfriend is into?
AITA for cutting off my hearing so I don’t have to listen to a family member.
AITA for making an uncomfortable joke when my friend told me her dinner table was full with family?
AITA for abandoning my daughter on vacation?
AITA for filling a few faux Amazon packages with my dog's shit to teach the two theiving neighborhood kids who have been stealing my packages a lesson?
UPDATE- AITA for wanting to bring the partner of my brother to his funeral?
AITA for taking an Uber to a wedding so I wouldn't be late?
AITA for refusing to give my partner the code to my safe?
AITA for not waking up my girlfriend for her exam after I overheard her calling me a little bitch?
AITA for blowing up on my husband infront of his family during N.Y.E celebration after he joked about my birth experience?
AITA for literally showing my dad how he behaves everyday when he gets home from work?
AITA for letting my nephew to call me mom?
AITA for admitting I regret having children.
AITA for insulting a girl's weight after she went off on me for touching her purse on a crowded train?
AITA for telling my SIL no cares that she’s pregnant
AITA? For refusing to let MIL spend the night in my bedroom and lock the door?
AITA for getting mad at my husband because he laughed when I told him to reheat his own dinner?
AITA For ignoring a coworker who refused to use my actual name?
AITA for taking back the beer I bought for a party from which I was uninvited?
AITA for not moving back home with my parents?
Aita for giving a woman a taste of her own behavior
AITA for forcing my tomboy daughter to wear formal clothing?
Update: WIBTA for sending neighbor a cease and desist letter?
WIBTA if I record the audio of my neighbours having sex and play it back to them?
AITA for being mad that my birthday gift was sex?
UPDATE: AITA for refusing to sell my rental properties at my fiance's request?
AITA for labeling all the bottles in the house because my adult children are idiots?
UPDATE: AITA for not waking my partner up and causing him to miss a family trip?
WIBTA for running away on our honeymoon?
AITA for refusing to name our daughter Karen?
AITA for recreating a "secret" cookie recipe the person does not give out?
AITA for correcting my daughter’s teacher about her name?
AITA for serving my sister's husband dinner using toy utensils?
AITA flipping out on my fiance for cancelling all the vegan food options from our wedding food menu behind my back?
AITA For suing my girlfriend after she had my 1967 impala project taken to the scrapyard?
AITA for not sharing medical history before being pranked?
UPDATE: Aita if I tell my friend her bf is planning to propose?
AITA for not backing down on my daughter’s teachers calling her the proper name?
AITA for not letting my roommate wear something she stole from me?
META: Warning for all posters: what happens in AITA does not stay in AITA!
AITA telling the truth in the wedding toast?
AITA for telling my wife I wont/can't watch our son?
AITA for not telling my wife that I picked her daughter up drunk from a house party?
AITA for making homemade food for everyone except my brother's stepdaughter?
AITA? Suing my neighbor after she sprayed weedicide on my lawn
AITA for telling the judge of a scholarship competition that if she already knew who she wanted to win, to cut the crap and just let us all go home?
AITA for kicking out my girlfriend
AITA for telling my boyfriend's co-worker that we're not married?
AITA for cancelling dinner when my boyfriend brought a bell to the diner to "grab" the staff's attention?
UPDATE: AITA for donating my deceased daughters college fund instead of giving it to my husbands daughter
AITA for asking a 47 year old man who is dating my 22 year old niece some pointed questions that made him “uncomfortable”?
AITA for ‘inserting myself’ into someone else’s dinner situation?
AITA for refusing to cook meat when my husband broke our (lonely) daughter’s only friendship because he hates vegans?
AITA for disowning my brother when he came out as gay, because of how he's treating his wife?
UPDATE AITA for threatening to ban my brother from my wedding because he plans on proposing at the reception?
AITA for canceling the family trip because my stepson damaged my plants?
AITA for saying no when my family said I should let my sister have her honeymoon at my house.
AITA for 100% refusing to let my dad/mom see my child for something done 10-15 years ago? /Petty
UPDATE AITA for not sharing my medical history before being pranked?
WIBTA if I told a close family friend that her husband cheated on her 4 years ago?
AITA for shutting down talk about having kids with “purposely controversial statements?”
AITA for being surly, rude and mean at a wedding and leaving early?
AITA for moving out and taking EVERYTHING
AITA I lied about having a college fund for my step sister to save my sister
AITA for kicking out my girlfriend because she said my relationship with my brother was disgusting.
AITA for walking out on my job?
UPDATE: AITA for getting upset about my boyfriends “guys nights”?
AITA for making sexy poses while neighbor kept recording me for no reason?
AITA for telling my step-dad and mom that they shouldn't be surprised at what my little brother said to them when they pulled a prank on him?
AITA UPDATE: AITA for telling my daughter it's her fault she has no pictures of herself?
AITA For cancelling my daughters therapy because she has bad grades?
UPDATE - AITA for throwing my kid's clothes onto the floor when they don't fold them neatly?
AITA for telling my girlfriend that her phobia is ridiculous and she needs treatment?
AITA for cutting my hair after a friend's death despite a contract that dictates what I'm allowed to do - or not to do - with my hair?
UPDATE: AITA for refusing to sell the place I bought with "stripper money"?
AITA for walking out of the babyshower my InLaws threw for me?
AITA for cancelling a check of $12,000 that I wrote for my infertile friend for her next IVF cycle over a joke?
AITA for not letting my kids go on vacation with my ex because it's my time with them.
AITA For Barring My Husband From The Bedroom Tonight?
AITA For Calling My BIL Out For His Weaponized Incompetence And Calling Him Pathetic At Dinner?
AITA for ruining game night by telling the truth?
AITA for refusing my future sister in law's request to dye my hair for my brother's wedding?
AITA for throwing out my husband's dinner after he went to eat at his mom's house?
UPDATE: WIBTA for reporting a coworker for feeding me?
AITA for still going to my sister's wedding after my husband canceled my plane ticket?
AITA for putting my dog's wee-wee pads on the bathroom floor b/c my BF has bad aim and keeps missing the toilet?
AITA For Telling My Wife That If She Quits Her Job I Expect Her To Cover All The Housework?
AITA if I stop paying my daughter’s tuition over a disgusting comment she made towards my new girlfriend?
AITA for telling my brother in law that paternity tests aren't automatic
AITA for telling my family that if they want Thanksgiving, they'll have to get off their asses and plan it?
Update: AITA for inviting my dad's girlfriend over my real mom to spend the day with me?
UPDATE: AITA for blowing up at my friend who constantly makes comments about my boobs?
AITA for calling out my kids’ future stepmom for treating me like a surrogate?
UPDATE: AITA for kicking a girl out of my bridal party because of how sensitive she was being towards my ideas for dresses?
UPDATE: AITA for checking my blood sugar at my desk when my coworker has a severe blood phobia?
Update to AITA for not tell my Dad he isn't getting the inheritance he is expecting?
AITA for hiding embarrassing notes in my house as a joke because I know my fiance's mom snoops?
UPDATE: AITA for letting my brother call me "dad" and refusing to tell him the ugly truth?
AITA for telling someone that his art sucks and he won't amount to much in life in front of his friends and family.
AITA for telling cashier that wasn’t the girls credit card?
AITA for refusing to help my step sister with her house purchase and telling her and my step father that it's because of how they treated me as a child?
AITA for despising my mentally handicap sister?
AITA for telling my friend her parents bought her house, not her?
AITA for telling my wife that the only reason she says 'money doesn't matter' is because we're rich?
Update - WIBTA if I still give my stepson the birthday gift I bought for him despite his mother asking me to hold it off for a month because she knows my gift will upstage hers and she wants to see him enjoy her gift first?
UPDATE: AITA for raining on my cousin's parade regarding the name she picked out for her baby?
AITA for leaving my inlaws house with my daughter after she told me she was feeling uncomfortable?
AITA for losing weight before my sister's wedding?
AITA for telling my extended family how many men (roughly) my sister has slept with after she outed our youngest brother as a virgin?
AITA for calling my boyfriend an insecure little boy after his repeated jokes that I "cheated the system" to get to a career that pays more than his?
AITA for telling my daughter to get over herself?
AITA for leaving my babies inside by themselves
AITA for scolding my struggling sister when she gives us grief about adopting a baby?
AITA for refusing to return a tip AND telling a couple that I dont have time to play mediator?
So we decided to fuck with the sub.
AITA for telling my parents that they ruined NY celebration after they kicked my husband out over a joke?
AITA for banishing my teenage daughter's friend from our house because she made fun of my weight?
AITA for telling my mom we haven’t had a good relationship in a long time and I wanted to go live with my dad?
AITA for calling my mom when my husband refused to listen to me?
Update: AITA for accidentally calling out a new colleague on lying about her language skills?
Update: AITA for not letting my best friend have her wedding on my property after being uninvited?
AITA fot kicking out my daughter after she tried to send my cat to the shelter?
AITA For Telling My Sister She Was Dating My Bio-Father?
WIBTA if I send my parents to jail?
Aita: For giving my deceased son's college fund to his best friend instead of my nephew?
AITA for telling a pregnant woman to sit on the ground instead of giving her my seat?
AITA for taking my newborn son and going to my mom's house because my husband his mom didn't save me any food for dinner?
AITA for telling my inlaws about what their son's girlfriend did to my son's blanket and causing her to get shunned?
AITA for letting my brother call me "dad" and refusing to tell him the ugly truth?
AITA for telling a friend's bf her intentions of getting pregnant?
AITA for refusing to pay at a restaurant that was false advertising?
AITA - for not allowing someone to propose during my wedding reception and for planning on not going to their wedding?
AITA for refusing to let my sister and her kids move into the house that I bought?
AITA for not paying to change my father's gravely insulting gravestone?
AITA for sleeping naked on top of the covers to teach my flatmate's gf a lesson?
AITA for having a wedding and not disclosing we were already legally married?
AITA for telling off my MIL for insisting my daughter doesn't have a "real" vagina?
WIBTA If I sued my boyfriend’s elderly mother and pressed charges against her?
AITA for refusing to use the money I inherited from my mother to pay for medical treatment for my half-sister, who has a life threatening sickness? She is the child of my father and the woman he cheated on my mother with.
Aita For leaving in an Uber after my engagement party?
AITA for cancelling the family trip after I found out that my wife cancelled my son's ticket?
AITA because I refuse to go and visit my special needs stepsister in hospital even though she’s very sick? I low key hate her.
AITA for ignoring my mom asking me to get involved with her new family after I got rich?
AITA for returning a birthday gift I got for my boyfriend after he insulted me about my “colorful” past?
AITA for making my parents choose between my sister going to jail or replacing my car with their vacation money.
AITA for being honest about how I was bullied and how the teachers at my school did nothing about it while being interviewed by a current student?
AITA for telling my father "we'll catch the next one" when he invited me to his wedding?
AITAH for giving guardianship of my son to my aunt over my mother after I die of my terminal cancer
Update: AITA for not wanting to hide that my moms are gay to my girlfriend’s parents?
WIBTA if I report the nurse practitioner at urgent care to HR for basically slut shaming me?
AITA for firing my babysitter for getting drunk on the job
AITA for ruining my brother's marriage because his wife left me at the pool
AITA for being livid at my (now) husband?
AITA for not letting my parents into my son's life after they secretly tested his DNA?
AITA for how I responded to a senior HR member accusing me of taking drugs at work?
AITA for leaving my wife by herself when she talks in a cringy manner
AITA for kicking out one of my bridesmaids for showing up in the wrong dress?
AITA for being visibly shocked/dumbfounded that my GF (21, American) could not point out Florida on a map?
AITA for making a scene of my adult son and sticking my nose in his marriage
AITA for demanding my sister pay rent for living-at-home with my parents and refusing to pay my rent until she does?
AITA for telling my girlfriend to shut the fuck up after she insulted my sisters thighs?
UPDATE: AITA for kicking a friend out of my house for what she said?
AITA for interrupting my husband's "Live stream" and going off on him after he "forgot" to feed and change our daughter's diaper?
AITA for making a big deal about 1 extra credit point on my child's test?
UPDATE: AITA for deactivating my niece's social media when she refused to do an internet safety course?
AITA for telling my new neighbours that I've been trapped in a basement for a week after she told me not to check my mail box on weekends?
AITA for dropping my freeloading brother off at our aunt's house after she called and scolded me for evicting him?
AITA for bringing up my brother's "premature" birth at Christmas dinner to get my parents to shut up?
AITA for telling my roommate that the name she chose for her baby is ‘ridiculously stupid’?
AITA for making my boyfriend feel uncomfortable after he insisted on joining us on girls night in?
AITA for asking my brother not to bring his boyfriend to my wedding?
AITA for cancelling my wedding because fiancee almost got my dog killed?
AITA for forcing my son to use a bidet and threatening to talk to his friends or take him to the doctor about his underwear
AITA for laughing in my mother's friends face when she told me to 'go to my room'?
AITA for leaving in the middle of celebration because of the toast my husband gave?
AITA for telling my sister there’s a reason her kids chose to live with their dad?
AITA for being completely honest to my biological parents about how my childhood was really awful?
AITA for telling my parents they made my sister getting pregnant ruin my life?
AITA for expecting my boyfriend to replace all my socks, the exact same ones as I had before?
AITA for freaking out when my wife locked our son out of the house at night after he drank alcohol?
AITA for telling my wife it’s not ‘cute’ for her to encourage our teenage daughter to expect her boyfriend to pay for EVERYTHING in their relationship?
AITA for "making" my boyfriend eat fast food for a week?
AITA for refusing to pay for girl’s wig after she shaved it because of me?
AITA for yelling at a kid for crawling under my table at a restaurant?
AITA for not inviting the neighborhood snitch or the HOA board to our neighborhood BBQ?
AITA for rejecting the role of "cool aunt" because it was really more like unpaid babysitter?
AITA for emasculating my BF?
AITA for not paying for my daughter's wedding because she invited my brother and his family
AITA for not babysitting for my sister in law any more after she called the police on me?
UPDATE: AITA for not letting my sister see her kids?
UPDATE: AITA for not agreeing to a paternity test unless my husband goes to therapy?
AITA for telling a guy what I do for work and letting him pay for my drinks during the whole evening?
AITA for embarrassing my FIL after I repeatedly asked him to explain his joke to me?
AITA for getting mad my artist hid their initials in my tattoo?
AITA for not letting my sister see her kids?
AITA for making my SIL pay above average rent for one bedroom?
I'm back like I said I would be,. My [original post](https://www.reddit.com/r/AmItheAsshole/comments/awyi8k/aita_for_despising_my_mentally_handicap_sister/) got a lot of attention and seeing as you guys seem interested, here's my update.

Well, since that day I made the post i've been staying with my grandfather. The week's been honestly a huge change for me for better and for worse but i'll try to run it down.

I started by telling my grandpa the story of why I broke down the way I did and to be honest, he seemed horrified. No one in my family knew my parents were using me as essentially a free care service for my sister. My grandpa told me some things that I don't feel comfortable repeating here but in essence my sister is "supposed" to be getting care from a professional and that my parents were ignoring that, along with this I was not supposed to be caring for her at all with her mental state as apparently she is a danger to herself and others. With everything else I told him, along with stuff like the movie indecent he was really mad and told me to not contact my parents without him there. He pretty much told me that he would be meeting with my parents beforehand and that he was going to be there when I sat down with them. It didn't end here either, the rest of the week consisted of other family checking in on me and telling me things my parents hid from me. This included the fact that my parents have been taking money from family to fund a "caretaker" that doesn't exist.

Suffice to say, this week has been rough. But, the upside is that even through all this, my extended family has been giving me more love than i've felt in a while. My grandfather spent this last week "making up for the time i've lost." Encouraging me to spend time with friends and do things I want to do. My aunts and uncles have also been helping me through the week.

Well, Saturday night I sat down with parents to talk. It went badly to say the least. They came clean to me about everything. They told me things I will not repeat here. But they did not apologize. My parents still claim that I some how owed my sister my time. My father even saying "You were put here to be her caretaker". I won't lie and say I was composed. After everything i learned I confronted them. On the fact that my sister needed a caretaker. The money my dad was taking from his sister, and a few other things. They denied it or made excuses. And in the end, we ended off in a worse place than before.

Today will be my last time talking to them for a while. After talking with my grandfather and uncle last night, I'm not going back. Later today i'm going there and picking up my stuff and moving in with my grandfather. When I graduate high school i'm planning on leaving the state to go to school. My aunt has told me that the money she was sending my dad will be instead be coming to me from now on. My parents have called me twice since Saturday, neither of them were to apologize and only ask when I was coming home.

I won't be going back to them. Right now I still feel pretty uneasy about everything but I feel like that will pass. The rest of my family is showing their support to me and honestly, it feel great. But in the end I lost my parents. Over all of this, i've learned something that I wished I saw earlier. I don't hat my sister. In fact I love her with all my heart. I should never have never projected my hate onto her. That was wrong, and someday I hope to make up for it. But for now I need to leave.

So, there's my update. Thanks again for the support my original post got. I really appreciate everyone who took the time to comment or show me support. Thanks you.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Edit: Thank you all so much! I wish I could respond to every single one of you but my lunch only lasts so long. I'll update tonight how the move out went but until then, thank you all. I want to say that your support has been amazing and your kindness means more to me than anyone could ever imagine.

&#x200B;

Late edit: Wow, I never imagined my story would reach the popularity it did. I know it's kinda cliche and i've said it a thousand times but thank you all. 

&#x200B;

We just got back from moving my things out of my parents house. Every thing I wanted to take my grandpa and uncle helped move and it's at my grandpa's house now. I have my birth certificate, social security card, and every other document and record I could think of. My parents were quiet the whole time I was there. Shorty after I arrived my dad left with my sister and my mom only hovered over us silently as me moved. It took a while but as we left she broke down and told me she loved me and would miss me. I hugged her and said goodbye, and that was it. Even now I sit here and think if she really meant it. After this whole week of her not saying anything she waited till the end. I hope she meant it. Right now though, I think I just need to look ahead. Maybe one day me and my parents can reconnect. I hope so.

&#x200B;

Thank you all for the advice and love. It's been amazing and i'm glad that through this experience I at least got some positive out of this mess. Will I come back? I don't know. If something happens and you guys still want an update i'll maybe come around again. But for now I'm going to move on. For all those out there who shared their stories with me, thank you, and I hope to see you on the other side. See you space cowboy's :)
AITA for getting my boyfriend arrested
AITA for banning my MIL from the house?
UPDATE aita for telling my fiancée we should call of the wedding if she doesn’t approve of my female best man
AITA for refusing to support my niece's lifestyle?
AITA for refusing to sell the place I bought with "stripper money"?
AITA for not telling him dinner is ready?
AITA for ruining a proposal?
AITA for moving out when my parents asked me to pay rent.
AITA for blowing up on my fiancé infront of his family for getting my daughter's cat out of the house?
AITA for making fun of a girl for her dad's 9/11 death?
AITA for refusing to let my family meet my daughter after all of them dropped out my wedding upon finding out my wife was pregnant?
UPDATE: AITA for telling my boyfriend he’s a bad person?
AITA for telling my grandparents about my stepsiblings destroying my jewelry?
(UPDATE) AITA for telling my step-daughter to “go ask her real dad” when she asked me to pay for her plane tickets?
AITA for telling my husband he is either married to me or his co-worker?
AITA for throwing out my mom after she threw out my weed?
AITA for refusing to pay for my friend's EpiPen?
AITA friend is always late so we give her a earlier time, she actually showed up on time and is pissed
UPDATE: AITA for taking my niece to court over a coat?
AITA for “period shaming” my daughter?
AITA for refusing to let my stepson return home without punishment after he ruined my daughter's book collection?
AITA for calling my parents assholes for what they did to my birthday
AITA for banning my MIL from the house after I discovered that she's installed a camera in the bedroom?
AITA for denying an older woman shelter from a storm?
AITA For siding with my brother and SIL over my parents?
AITA for telling my cousin that I would not make a blanket for her kid for free
AITA for telling my husband that I won't punish my daughter for speaking another language in the house because it upsets his son?
AITA for not spending this Christmas in the hospital with my daughter?
AITA for telling my ex his lack of money is not my issue?
AITA for punishing my son after he said something racist?
AITA for revealing to my dad’s wife the real reason why me and him were never close?
AITA for dropping our dinner on the ground and walking out when my boyfriend asked me "What's for dinner tonight, b*tch?"
AITA for telling my brother that his crush dislikes him because he’s an asshole, not because he’s “too smart”?
AITA for getting an entire table for myself after my husband and his mom didn't save me a seat?
AITA for leaving the restaurant after my bf refused to pay for my meal?
AITA For purposely stopping my classmate from winning an award and subsequently making her cry?
AITA For filing a complaint against my doctor after she gave my mom my medical information?
UPDATE : AITAH for giving guardianship of my son to my aunt over my mother after I die of my terminal cancer
AITA for leaving a fake postive pregnancy test in the bedroom to catch my husband's mom snooping?
AITA for "forcing" my boyfriend to do the dishes?
AITA for acting like a conspiracy theorist to get out of political arguments with my Dad?
AITA for moving all my stuff to my guest room after my husband refused to stop turning the light on at 3am?
AITA for being cold to my ex-fiancé and demanding a paternity test after her infidelity?
AITA for calling my brother an “insecure, testicle grabbing, chauvinist man-baby” over his comments about my wife’s makeup?
AITA for not packing my husband's bags so he could go spend Xmas with his family without me?
AITA for cancelling on a group of very out of shape women that hired me to train/guide their hikes?
Update AITA if I tell my daughter Grandma is ashamed of her race
AITA for showing my twin sister’s onlyfans to our parents?
AITA for laughing hysterically after my husband called me "housewife" and embarrasing him infront of coworkers?
AITA for storming off from my sister's wedding after she deadnamed my son?
AITA for removing the bedroom lock after my husband ignored a family emergency?
META: This sub is moving towards a value system that frequently doesn't align with the rest of the world
AITA for "mansplaining" vaginas to a woman?
AITA if I "cancel" Christmas because I can't afford it this year?
UPDATE: AITA for not adhering to the wedding dress code
AITA for making my chronically late friend miss her seminar?
AITA for removing my daughter’s bedroom door because she won’t stop slamming it?
AITA for telling my autistic brother the truth when he asked me why women don’t like him?
AITA for telling mom "no apology, no wedding invitation" after seeing the wedding gift she gave my fiancè?
AITA for not inviting my kid's whole class to his birthday party?
AITA for Telling My Twin that She Should Have Worked on Herself Instead of Expecting Me to Let Myself Go for Her Wedding?
AITA for suing my ex and her boyfriend?
AITA for not waking my husband up for his 5AM walk?
AITA for laughing when my son came home from meeting his girlfriend's parents because he chose to behave like he does at home?
AITA - I missed my daughter’s award ceremony because of my son, she’s still not speaking to me
AITA for telling my son he deserved his gf breaking up with him?
AITA for calling the police on my fiance?
AITA for medically tattooing my child under the recommendation of a doctor.
AITA for grounding my daughter because she called my SIL a “slut”?
AITA for telling my surrogate to stop acting like she was my husband's wife?
AITA for selling my daughter's car after discovering her texting & driving?
AITA for making my father re-book my wedding venue at nearly triple the original cost after my stepsister cancelled my original booking?
AITA for screaming at my husband and his sister to get out of my kitchen?
UPDATE ~ AITA For walking out on a double date my friend set up with him, his girlfriend and a girl I had already rejected before
UPDATE: WIBTA if I took over planning my own funeral from my very religious parents?
AITA for tipping our waitress 20 dollars despite her poor service, because my date was playing a "game" with her tips?
AITA for asking my son and daughter inlaw for a copy of the key to the new house they bought?
AITA for banning my father from my home because he banned me from his when I was younger?
AITA for calling my sisters husband useless?
AITA for the email I sent to a teacher about her "You have to include everyone" rules, saying that was a dangerous lesson?
AITA for throwing my sister out of my house after she billed me?
AITA for getting my daughter a hotel room entirely for herself after her stepsisters made her sleep on the floor?
AITA for telling my roommates gf that she's not woke if she's wrong
AITA for going “bridezilla” after my bridesmaid spilled wine on my wedding dress?
AITA for allowing my terminally ill daughter to smoke and drink?
Aita for giving all of my coworkers a different reason for why I have missing fingers?
AITA for making a dad joke?
UPDATE: AITA for not answering any contact from work while on maternity leave?
AITA for deleting my son's Minecraft world?
AITA for not donating my liver due to a lawsuit and the person died?
AITA for "forcing" my husband to sleep on the couch.
AITA for cooking food while my roommate's girlfriend was here & offering her some
AITA for humiliating a man and his entire family when he proposed to me?
AITA for refusing to forgive my Dad for breaking our deal?
AITA for being honest with my nephew about where I was for most of his life?
AITA? for refusing to sign anything while my eyes are blindfolded?
UPDATE: AITA for the way I reacted to my parents open relationship and no longer paying rent
AITA for moving to a hotel because my wife's family insisted I sleep on the couch?
AITA for making fun of a white girl for being poor because she was being racist?
AITA for giving my wife an ultimatum about getting a dog?
UPDATE: AITA for shouting at my ex in front of my daughters?
AITA for laughing in my brother and SIL’s faces when they demanded to use my credit card?
AITA For not switching places with my friend and ruining her life
AITA for not saying anything about the underwear?
AITA for screaming at & banning my SIL & niece from my home after they DESTROYED my houseplants?
UPDATE: AITA for not explicitly telling my grandpa I’m married to another woman?
AITA For Telling My Cousin That She's The Reason My Husband And I Have Re-Considered Adoption?
META At any point, the advice you're reading could be coming from someone too young to sign up for social media without parental permissions.
AITA for yelling at my husband and telling him to get over himself after he threw away my tampon box?
AITA for cussing at a lady at the park?
AITA for yelling at my girlfriend to “stop fucking eating?”
AITA for telling my GF's daughter she's not my daughter so don't expect me to pay?
AITA for taking my ex-gf off my insurance policy to force her to give me full custody of my daughter?
AITA For posting videos of my niece and nephew misbehaving in response to my sister’s complaints that I did not want them at my birthday dinner?
AITA for throwing away the elf on the shelf and "ruining Christmas" for my kids after my husband's prank?
AITA For kicking my friend out of my house after what she did?
AITA for writing a bad yelp review about my childs daycare calling them racist
AITA for doing the same thing to my sister-in-law that she does to my son?
AITA for yelling at a lady who was looking into my windows to stalk her son?
AITA for telling my son that if he changes his last name then I’m no longer his Father?
UPDATE My brother came out to me!
AITA for refusing to punish or allow my wife to punish our son?
AITA for regifting my kids their own tablets for Christmas?
AITA for telling my parents they were bad parents to me?
UPDATE - AITA for wearing my GF's hoodie?
AITA ruining my friend's birthday party by taking back the cake I baked for her?
AITA for "imposing my culture" even though I thought I was just being nice?
AITA for laughing at my mom after she and my dad insisted i tell my friend’s boyfriend to leave my house?
AITA for telling a guy with autism off because he wouldn’t stop talking about something he knows nothing about?
AITA for kicking my sister out to the streets because she cannot take my "f***ing violin" playing?
AITA for not telling people my missing cousin is staying with me right away?
AITA for kicking my cousin off of my sister’s wedding Zoom call?
AITA for flipping out on my sons school after they lied to him about donation prizes?
AITA for telling my stepdaughter she’s absolutely under no circumstances allowed to switch out my cats food for vegan food even though she’s losing weight because the sight of normal cat food makes her sick?
AITA for demanding my son take his daughter on his family trip to Disneyland?
META: For the overall health of this sub, please up-vote the Assholes!
AITA For quitting on the spot even though we were understaff and it made my manager cry?
Update: AITA For Pouring my Husbands Sweet Tea Down the Drain?
AITA for “ruining” my sister in law’s honeymoon by exposing her racism?
AITA for not letting my sister have "custody" of her bio kids, who I adopted?
AITA for posting a tribute of my late-girlfriend onto FB who died during the 9/11 attacks?
AITA for telling my fiancé if I see her friend again I’m calling the cops.
AITA for being mad my girlfriend took my keys?
UPDATE: WIBTA If I stopped baking cookies for the retreats that have come to expect them?
META You can still be the asshole if you were wronged
AITA for yelling at a little girl to get out of my face
AITA for insisting that my boyfriend pay me for breaking my $3,500 model ship?
AITA for serving my husband's family Mac N Cheese for dinner?
AITA for not letting my best friend have her wedding on my property after being uninvited?
Update: AITA for shutting down all black names because I think it'll make my son's life harder?
AITA for wearing a wedding dress at a wedding?
Update: AITA for picking out the peas from my dinner in front of my mum's boss
AITA for dressing nicer than the couple getting married?
AITA for having my kids wear tie dye when with their dad?
AITA for asking my cousin not to bring his autistic son (my nephew) to my home any more because of a romantic attachment to my wife?
UPDATE, AITA for despising my mentally handicap sister?
AITA for telling someone she’s the common denominator in her failed friendships?
AITA for reporting my teacher over a very uncomfortable joke?
AITA for refusing to answer to a nickname I don’t like?
AITA for calling the Police on my fiancé?
AITA for turning off the wifi when my husband camps in the bathroom for extended lengths of time.
AITA for refusing to lie to my mother's husband about how I met my husband?
AITA because I ate more than "my share" of a 6 foot party sub last night?
AITA for telling my daughter [26F] that I [55M] will not walk down the aisle with her stepdad [50M].
AITA for exposing my parents' favoritism
AITA for buying a $50,000 guitar for $4,000 and refusing to sell it back when the buyer found out the real value?
Aita for refusing to attend an apology dinner after my mother in law called me a bad mother at my son's funeral?
AITA for only paying for myself when my fiance and future inlaws invited me to a NYE dinner at a scale restaurant?
WIBTA if I started calling my white coworkers by random 'white' names?
AITA for cutting off my mother when she got a paternity test for my daughter?
WIBTA if I go on vacation instead of my brothers wedding?
AITA for asking moms boyfriend to stop trying to parent me?
AITA for telling a family to fly private?
AITA For kissing my friends brother without his consent during a truth or dare?
AITA for breaking my promise to my stepkids, and "abandoning and traumatizing" them because I did not want to parent them anymore?
AITA for saying my wife will have to quit her job if we get booted from another daycare?
AITA For walling off my backyard because I dislike 2 kids and depriving everyone else as a result?
AITA for watching GoT on an airplane?
AITA for leaving my husband in the grocery store because he started acting like a toddler?
AITA for walking out of the Airport when I saw my husband's mom standing there with her luggage?
AITA for telling my sister her son is only special to her
Aita for telling my brother he got exactly what he deserved when he pushed his girlfriend away for being a “gold digger”?
AITA for making my step sister seem "uneducated"?
WIBTA if I reported my daughter’s teacher for not pronouncing her name correctly?
AITA for selling my family home because my pregnant sil ate my dinner
AITA for leaving a repairman a bad review for flirting with my wife?
WIBTA if I refuse to go to my sister's wedding because I can't bring my girlfriend as my +1?
AITA for walking out after a boss tried to refuse to accept my resignation?
AITA for not cleaning while I cook just to prove a point to my husband?
AITA for suggesting that my sister chose an easy love?
AITA for telling my grandma she looks like Ronald McDonald because she wouldn’t stop telling me I look like a bull with my nose ring in?
AITA for treating my two daughters' pregnancies differently?
AITA for saying my secret workout routine is depression?
AITA for telling my parents I won't drive my brother to school unless he is more hygienic because his smell literally makes me sick?
AITA for lying about my biggest fear on a quiz show and subsequently winning a car and making other contestants lose?
AITA for faking sleeping all night to see if my wife is lying?
WIBTA for not attending my twin brothers surprise birthday dinner when I was only invited as a guest
AITA? For not wearing a wedding ring and making my coworker think I'm single?
UPDATE AITA for not letting my child speak her "native" language at home
AITA for calling my mother a racist bitch and disregarding the punishment she gave me?
UPDATE: AITA for telling my girlfriend that being depressed is not an excuse for being lazy?
AITA for not wanting to celebrate my mom on MY birthday?
AITA for making a fake diary entry to catch my stepmom?
AITA? I found out my sister is pretending to be my daughter's mother
[UPDATE] AITA for telling an employee she can choose between demotion or termination?
AITA for not inviting family members to my wedding?
AITA for refusing to put my fiance on the house title after he kept handing me empty pens as a prank?
AITA? I went on vacation with my friend and her family, and they kicked me out. I got my own room and stayed.
AITA for forcing a confession out of my wife about spying on my kids therapy sessions
Update:AITA for objecting to 'girls day'?
AITA for telling my friend she got an STD from sleeping around?
WIBTA if I change my wifi password, making it impossible for a kid to not be able to attend her classes?
AITA for telling my wife it was a mistake to stay at a baby shower?
AITA for refusing to split my inheritance with my siblings?
AITA for not forgiving my(27) fiance(28) for missing the birth of our daughter?
aita for ruining my sister’s wedding.
AITA for leaving the restaurant before my boyfriend's family arrived after I was told that I was going to pay for their meals?
AITA for "pregaming" my wife's dinners?
AITA for telling relatives how much I make and defending my salary?
AITA for telling my niece to stay in the closet until she gets her inheritance?
AITA for saying I won’t coddle my infertile sister any more?
AITA for refusing to buy a coworker lunch
WIBTA if I told my family that our "secret family recipe" came from the side of a can?
AITA for responding to my father’s request for a relationship with a detailed PowerPoint on why he will never be forgiven?
AITA for not wanting my husband to go to his ex's funeral?
AITA for moving out mid-lease and stranding my roommate with full rent after his girlfriend keeps accusing me of being “creepy”?
AITA for leaving a family gathering because my family made me sit at the kid table?
AITA for telling my mother that my step dad will not be walking me down the aisle because I hate him, and in turn ripping my family apart?
AITA for starting my wedding on time and not waiting for my parents?
AITA for telling my mom she’s a whore?
AITA for refusing to pay back my cousin after my baby ruined her blouse?
AITA for not giving my sister her wedding dress because she didn't invited my underage son?
AITA for telling my SIL she can leave Christmas dinner when she freaked out over tampons?
AITA for searching my husband's pants without asking him first?
AITA for not letting my brother and SIL see my daughter after they threw away her medicine
AITA for getting upset and telling my dad his girlfriend didn't buy me a Starbucks drink?
UPDATE: AITA for kicking out my identical twin for selling nudes online?
AITA for serving vegan food at my wedding?
AITA for possibly stealing from a convenience store multiple times and not saying anything about it.
AITA For "Ruining" my kid's life after she ruined a dress?
AITA? Husband threw a BBQ party for his friends. I refused to help. Party was a disaster.
Aita for wearing the “joke” bikini my friend got me?
AITA for not accepting my sister's relationship with my ex despite her having cancer as a teenager?
AITA for giving away my grandparents’ gift intended for my fiancé
AITA for punishing my sons and not the woman?
AITA for burning bridges with my in-laws at my husband's funeral?
AITA for using money we "earmarked" for our 6 month old's college fund to buy back the exact 1972 Ford Bronco I owned as a teenager?
Update: AITA for not attending my friend's wedding on the day of my family's death anniversary?
AITA for telling this college guy's mom that her coming into his interview cost him the job?
AITA for kicking out my dad and his pregnant wife out of the home I legally own after they sent my depressed sister to live with our aunt?
AITA for kicking girlfriend out after she deleted dead wife’s pictures from my phone?
AITA for calling the police on my client?
AITA for calling my SIL a racist after she compared my cooking to "making kung pao chicken"?
Hey Assholes, you're doing it wrong.
AITA for not wanting coal for Christmas?
AITA for getting mad at my sister for not wanting me shirtless at her pool?
AITA for not telling my family which of my children is biologically mine?
AITA for I telling my childhood bully (who is MtF transgender) that she will always be the “boy who bullied me”?
UPDATE: AITA for wanting my boyfriend to come straight home after work (on some days) to help me destress after taking care of our 4 month old son all day?
AITA for ruining both my parents marriages for disowning me?
UPDATE: AITA for possibly making my parents homeless?
AITA for going to a different hotel during my vacation with my husband?
AITA for not agreeing to a name change for my daughter, despite her father wanting one?
AITA for threatening to financially cut off my son over a baby name?
AITA for being upset because my son didn’t talk to me, but talked to my wife.
AITA for telling my girlfriend she isn’t welcome at my house anymore unless she seriously fixes her attitude regarding my best friend?
AITA for showing my boyfriend my used sanitary towel in an argument?
AITA for buying lower grade steaks when my in-laws visit and serving my mom and dad Wagyu.
AITA for wanting my daughter’s boyfriend/soon-to-be fiance to know her dark secret before marriage?
AITA for refusing to give my parents money?
AITA for secretly feeding my sister vegetables?
AITA for pressing charges against my son?
AITA dad gave the business to brother so I left
AITA for kicking out a girl from my daughter's sleepover bday party?
AITA for ordering a giant steak against my MIL will, actually eating it and refusing to cover the entire bill?
AITA for replying to a rude customer in the language they were speaking in front of me?
WIBTA for spraying some kid with my garden hose daily after he walks all over our lawn
AITA for telling my brother it’s pathetic that he can’t do the basics of what his wife did.
AITA for being topless at home?
AITA for telling another gym member to wear a bra?
AITA for doing the absolute minimum chores after my girlfriend parents implied I wasn't a man and she agreed with them?
AITA For telling my pregnant daughter that my husband and I will have nothing to do with raising her baby in front of the entire family?
AITA for telling my daughter the truth about why I wasn’t in her life?
AITA for telling my wife’s friend she is too old and ugly after she repeatedly asked my 19-year-old son to take off his shirt? He was getting uncomfortable.
AITA for not using my daughter's college fund for my stepson's rehab?
AITA for giving my dad his money back in front of his other kids and telling him he was no longer welcome at my graduation?
Aita for only going to black salons
AITA for demanding the same Christmas present my stepbrother got?
AITA for my reaction when I learned that my fiance returned my wedding dress and replaced it with the one his mom picked for me?
AITA for DEMANDING my SIL replace the expensive fabric she and her children DESTROYED with EQUAL fabric?
AITA for calling my daughters father Spineless and his girlfriend creepy over their name choice for their daughter?
AITA for calling the Police on my husband after I found that he was hiding my son's motorcycle?
AITA for telling a social worker the real reason my sister wants a foster kid?
AITA for refusing to take my friends package with me internationally without opening and checking it first?
AITA for kicking my SiL out after she threw away most of my single use baby products and even formula?
AITA for taking my daughter to get her hair cut when I knew it would upset my wife?
AITA for bringing a baby to a class??
Note. My step-daughter, Madeline, was about a year old when I married her mother, Jessica. Madeline’s father died before she was born. 
 
Madeline is currently 15, and she’s rebelling for almost everything. She did something bad, so while picking her up, I set a punishment up for her. Then she said “You’re not my dad. I don’t have to follow you”. Honestly, I got a bit hurt from that. But I understand that she didn’t mean it, and that she’d probably change. I just replied “I’m still your legal guardian for the next 3 years, and as long as your in my house, you have to follow my rules.” 
 
That happened about 2 days ago. So our family was going grocery shopping, when Madeline said “I’m hungry. I need food.” I decide to be extremely cheeky and say “Hi Hungry, I’m not your dad.” My son just started to laugh uncontrollably. My daughter was just quiet with embarrassment. And my wife was berating me “Not to stoop down to her level.” 
 
I honestly thought it was a funny dad joke. And my son agrees. So AITA?
 
Edit: I did adopt her. So legally I am her parent.

 
Mini Update: I’ll probably give a full update later but here is what happened so far. I go to my daughter’s room after dinner and begin talking with her. “Hey. I’m really sorry that I hurt you by the words I said. And I am really your dad. I changed your diapers, I met your boyfriend, and I plan on helping you through college. And plus I’m legally your dad, so we’re stuck together. But seriously, I’m going to love you like my daughter even if you don’t think I’m your dad. Then I hugged her. She did start to cry. I assume that’s good.
AITA for kicking out my brother, who our parents have previously disowned, because he told my (now ex) fiancé that I cheated 9 years ago?
WIBTA if I quit my job, sell my share in company and retire to be a ski patroler? I would essentially leave my adult kids (18 and 22) to fend for themselves with no way to pay for college. Ex wife as well.
AITA? I didn’t attend my son’s wedding, I instead spent the evening with his ex wife.
AITA for not letting a friend use my umbrella in a Japanese downpour?
UPDATE: AITA for not telling my fiancee I used to work as an escort?
AITA for embarrassing a lunch thief at work.
AITA for moving out when my stepsister ruined my father's day gift for my dad?
AITA For Calling The Police On My Husband?
AITA for switching to regular milk to prove my lactose intolerant roommate keeps stealing from me?
AITA for not telling my ex I got pregnant
AITA for giving FMIL 3 days to pay me for a new wedding dress or else I show the family a photo of her wearing it?
AITA for telling my husband to lose the entitled attitude and do shit for himself?
AITA for proving to my roommate that her boyfriend keeps hitting on me?
AITA FOR NOT GIVING MY COUSIN MY GRANDMOTHER’s HOUSE AFTER SHE PASSED
AITA for demanding my mom apologize after she blew up at my girlfriend who she thought was being racist?
AITA For Making A "Pregnancy Jar"?
AITA for refusing to let a woman take for from my green house and pressing charges
AITA for not telling a vegan mom that the candy she stole from my kids and was eating, wasn’t vegan?
AITA for pressing charges?
AITA for 'going off' on a mother in the toy store
Update - AITA for telling my fiancee that if her cousin gets married on our wedding day that they won't be welcome at our wedding?
AITA for keeping the engagement ring and giving up asking to propose (after propose) in front of my parents and in-laws?
AITA For kicking my 3 sisters out of my wedding after they came with their kids?
AITA for asking for pocket money because "I am a kid too"
AITA for refusing to babysit my nephew, even in a family medical emergency, because my brother and SIL lied before?
AITA for "making fun" of a woman for being in her 40s and single?
AITA for screenshotting messages guys sent me and sending them to their mothers?
AITA for using my moms religion against her after insulting my sons hair?
AITA for not being upset that my friends dog could die because of me?
AITA For telling a stranger to delete a picture of me and my seizure alert dog that he took of me on the bus even after he told me why?
AITA for refusing to help my partner financially?
AITA for leaving significant facial scarring uncovered on a plane and being confrontational when a father asked me to cover it because it was scaring his son?
AITA for leaving my sister’s wedding early because she kept my husband out of pictures?
AITA for telling my wife I don’t care about her dreams?
AITA for refusing to tell my husband the gender of our baby after he skipped going to the dr appointment with me?
WIBTA if I refused to attend my cousins wedding after she asked me to dye my ginger hair?
AITA for making all the women in my family leave after they all showed up to my wedding wearing white?
AITA for serving a pregnant woman a non-alcoholic cocktail?
AITA For Not Forgiving My Husband (26m) For A Mistake And Not Trusting Him With Our Child?
AITA for telling my sister I don't trust her to watch my son?
AITA For pressing charges when my stepson took something my daughter inherited from her mother?
AITA for replacing myself with my twin brother at my in-laws’ Christmas Eve party to see if anyone noticed?
AITA? My husband won’t let me sleep.
AITA: I, a female, want to give my fiance my last name, but my father and brother don't want me to. Am I wrong for planning on doing it anyways?
AITA for kicking my son’s girlfriend out of our house?
AITA for telling my boyfriend he isn’t entitled to my inheritance?
AITA for refusing to drop charges against a 16 yo?
AITA for privately asking my friend about the paternity of her children
AITA for "announcing" that my dad's not paying my college tuition
AITA for telling my girlfriend I'll keep honoring my best friend's dying wish even if it makes her uncomfortable?
AITA for pointing at the kitchen when MIL asked "where is our dinner?".
AITA lost my temper and told my wife to "just shut up already, you don't get a say in this" after her constant inconsiderate nagging
AITA for telling my SIL that I don't care that her baby died and to leave me alone?
AITA for charging my sister £2500 for one of my paintings after her kid ruined it?
AITA for "tricking" my copycat sister to cut her hair?
AITA for not paying for the extra meal I accidentally ordered at a wedding?
AITA for celebrating my birthday which is the 1 year anniversary of my nephew's death?
AITA for not wanting my son to literally be named "John Doe?"
AITA for buying my boyfriend birthday gifts? I am confused and upset
AITA for shouting at my ex in front of my daughters?
AITA for honking at another driver who cut in front of me at a drive thru each time she tries to order
AITA for revealing our net worth when my wife constantly says we are broke and making me look bad with money?
AITA for deleting my friend's wedding photos in front of them?
AITA? For blowing up at my husband for lying to me about my sister and her baby leaving when he actually kicked her out?
AITA for refusing to move?
AITA for telling my sister to get over her daughter's achievements?
AITA For asking my GF to pay for a new prosthesis?
AITA for not taking down my video that was a gift from my best man.
AITA for cancelling the entire trip after finding out that my husband hid my daughter's passport?
AITA for refusing to move out?
AITA for changing the door locks back after my wife changed them?
AITA for putting a private conversation on loud speaker which cost my brother his 18 year relationship
AITA for telling my boyfriend that his masculinity was fragile after he refused to buy me pads?
AITA for telling a neighbour she can't expect only old people to live in our street?
AITA for suing my parents for my college money.
AITAA for taking my niece to court over a coat?
AITA for helping my friend get a girl removed from the soccer team?
AITA for no longer making toys and furniture for my former SIL after her new husband called them an “embarrassment” and me cheap for not paying for stuff?
AITA for choosing my brother over my marriage?
AITA for refusing to share my extra income with my wife when she didn't share hers with me when she earned more?
AITA for telling the principal that his punishment was dumb and taking my daughter out for a fun day instead
AITA for insisting I get the phone back despite policy?
AITA For refusing to listen to my parents and wanting to sue my cousin for a "prank"?
AITA for going to the police over a 'prank'
AITA for supporting my wife after my daughter publicly exposed her diary which had "cruel" comments?
UPDATE AITA for taking a 3 hour nap every day and expecting my husband to look after the kids and only wake me up for emergencies?
WIBTA for making my kid give a gift she really wants for her bday to the person she stole from?
AITA because I got my daughter a $80 dress?
AITA for telling my wife off after getting our daughter to cut her hair off, even after being told not to?
AITA for not telling someone I can read lips
My brother in-law (Sammy) lost his home shortly after his divorce 10 months ago. He moved in with us and brought his twin daughters (Olivia & Sloane18) with him a couple of months ago.
His sister (my wife) and I have one daughter (Zoey 16) and she and her cousins aren't close but get along fine.

Olivia & Sloane have no respect for Zoey's privacy, none. they used to walk into her room and take everything they get their hands on. Makeup, phone accessories, clothes, school laptop etc. Zoey complained a lot and I've already asked the girls to respect Zoey's privacy and stop taking things. My wife and Sammy saw no issue with this. After all, they're girls and this's typical teenage girls behavior. I completely disagreed. 

Last straw was when Zoey bought a 60$ m.a.c makeup-kit that looks like a paintset that she saved up for over a month and one of the girls, Sloane took it without permission and ruined it by mixing shades together while using it. Don't know much about makeup but that's what Zoey said when she found the kit on her bed, and was crying.
I told my wife and she said she'd ask Sloane to apologize but I got Zoey a lock after I found she was moving valuable belongings out the house because of this incidence!!!

Sammy and his daughters saw the lock and weren't happy, the girls were extremely upset.
Sammy asked about it and I straight up told him. He said "my daughters aren't thieves!!! it's normal that girls of the same age borrow each others stuff" he said Zoey could easily get another makeup kit for 15 bucks from walmart and shouldn't even be buying expensive - adult makeup in the first place and suggested my wife take care of this "defect" in Zoey's personality trying to appear older than she is.
He accused me of being overprotective and babying Zoey with this level of enablement.

I told him this's between me and my wife but she shamed me for putting a lock on Zoey's door for her cousins to see and preventing them from "spending time" with her saying I was supposed to treat them like daughters, then demanded I remove it but I said this lock does not get removed til her brother and his daughters are out of our house.

She got mad I was implying we kick them out and said her family'll hate me for this. so I reminded her that I let Sammy and his family move in which's something her OWN family refused to do so she should start with shaming/blaming them for not taking their own son and nieces/granddaughters in. if it wasn't for her family's unwillingness to help we wouldn't be dealing with this much disturbance at home.

Everyone's been giving me and Zoey silent treatment and my wife is very much upset over this.
AITA for refusing to RSVP to my sister’s wedding because I’m required to write an “application essay” just to attend?
AITA for letting my sister walk me down the aisle despite my fiance and his family's objections?
UPDATE: AITA for proposing to my girlfriend with a video game relic and refusing to buy a ring when asked
AITA for telling my son i’d rather have his ex wife as a daughter than him as my son after he got cut out of the will?
WIBTA if I refused to help with my partner's daughter's grad party after I've been banned from attending?
WIBTA if I called off my wedding because my fiance does not want my son to bring his boyfriend to the wedding?
AITA for going to my sister’s dream school when she just got rejected?
AITA for telling the girl who kissed my boyfriend for a play that she is desperate and pathetic?
AITA for telling my mom I'm not making her choose because I'm happy to be left out
AITA for telling my boyfriend's friends I make twice what he does, when they called me a gold digger and he didn't defend me?
AITA for pretending to get fired when customers get a temper with me?
UPDATE - AITA for getting a paternity test on my son who doesn’t look like me?
AITA for refusing to eat from my colleague's vegan birthday cake?
AITA for being “too honest” about why I don’t drink?
AITA for showing up to my husband's Dr appointment?
AITA For skipping Christmas with my parents since they won't treat me like an adult?
AITA for not letting my boyfriend name our daughter Renesmae?
AITA for asking a neighbor if she wanted to share food?
AITA for favoring my scapegoat brother over his golden child twin sister?
UPDATE: AITA for wanting to go to the funeral of a girl that I helped get addicted to drugs?
AITA for disposing my pads in my boyfriend’s bathroom?
AITA for telling one of my daughters classmates moms to fuck off about what I put in my daughters lunch?
AITA for returning my daughter's birthday cake after I discovered that my wife made changes to it?
WIBTA If I didn’t go to my brother’s wedding over a bridesmaid dress?
AITA for not trying harder to let my ex know our son passed
AITA for keeping my website up after being asked to remove it?
AITA for returning home after I found out that my husband booked 1st class for him and his friend while I got economy?
AITA for changing my name? my parents named me Qur'stylle (Chrystal)?
AITA for leaving my husband at home, while I spend the week at my brothers, because of how he “buys” groceries?
AITA for pulling my daughter from a waterpark trip because her teacher made her stay with a kid she doesn't like?
AITA for naming my child the same name that SIL named hers just weeks earlier?
AITA for calling out a secretary and threatening to report her to her manager after she revealed health information?
AITA for telling my sister she was out of her mind when she said she wanted to take back my child whom I adopted from her?
AITA for how I fought my boyfriend's medical bill, going "too far"?
AITA for high fiving a stranger who “humiliated” my bf?
AITA for refusing to watch my sister's stepkid and exposing her lies to her husband?
AITA for suggesting/letting my 17 year old son get drunk?
AITA for letting my 7 year old daughter call my husband "daddy", against the wishes of her biological father (my ex husband)?
AITA for causing drama during an important football game?
AITA for sending my coworker into anaphylactic shock?
AITA for calling my husband unreasonable for canceling the holiday trip just because me and the kids coupdn't help him in an emergency?
AITA for "forcing" my father to pay child support
Update: AITA for not wanting to give any money to my pregnant ex?
AITA for being upset and leaving when my sister in law stole my pregnancy announcement?
AITA for asking my transsexual ex-wife to dress more appropriately?
Want to NOT be the asshole? Adopt a dog in need!
Update: AITA for getting frustrated with my mom for being in the kitchen at the same time as me?
Aita: For yelling at my fiance for giving my dog away?
AITA for telling my wife and in-laws to fuck off after they told me to stop cuddling my daughter?
AITA for banning everyone who critiques our parenting from meeting our son?
UPDATE: AITA for "imposing my culture" even though I thought I was just being nice?
WIBTA if I played “Another One Bites the Dust” at my brother’s wake?
AITA for telling my husband he should be ashamed of himself and he would be incredibly lucky if his oldest daughter ever speaks to him again?
AITA for asking my friend for a “boob-voyage” party?
AITA for dropping the "We're Not Having Kids, Now Stop Bringing It Up" bomb on my MIL?
AITA for going into the ladies room?
AITA for checking my husband's dashcam footage on his car without his consent
AITA my classmate "saved goldfish" by releasing them into the ocean, I called her a dumbass
Update: AITA for dancing half naked in my living room leading to my bf and his family seeing me?
AITA For losing it after my wife wanted my daughter to stop using the bathroom in the house?
AITA for not attending my husband's celebration dinner due to the restaurant not having anything I could eat?
AITA for getting my aunt and uncle kicked out of their house for not letting my husband and I sleep together?
AITA? My parents took most of my wardrobe away as punishment and I said I didn't want the clothes back because it's obvious they're not actually mine.
AITA for replying to a coworkers inappropriate texts by work email, and attaching them?
AITA For telling my wife her parents are not allowed to ever watch our son again
AITA for “embarrassing” my cousin and getting us kicked out of a restaurant?
AITA for putting "ugly" one way mirrors on the windows facing one of my neighbors because I saw the husband looking in my windows?
AITA for suing my ex?
UPDATE: AITA for refusing to let my girlfriend get a dog because it will upset my old man of a cat?
AITA for ruining jeans for women?
AITA for leaving the family restaurant and starting my own after finding out I wouldn't inherit it?
AITA For walking out on a double date my friend set up with him, his girlfriend and a girl I had already rejected before
AITA for getting angry when my partner announced she’s pregnant?
AITA for getting upset with my husband after he told me nothing will change while I am pregnant?
AITA for not wanting my dad to “walk” me down the aisle because he’s in a wheelchair?
AITA for silently getting up and walking out of the restaurant during NYE dinner after I was told to pay for everyone at the table (my inlaws)?
AITA for "losing" my passport to avoid babysitting on my vacation?
AITA for saying my babysitting rates are $35 an hour?
AITA For telling my fianceé she's either with me or against me in this conflict?
UPDATE: AITA for throwing away my husband's Xbox after he refused to look for our lost dog?
AITA for taking crappy holiday photos because my MIL didn't want me in the photos?
Hello, everyone. First of all, thank you all for the kind words, support and love that everyone has offered and given. These weeks have been the most difficult I have ever experienced and it is with great sadness that I tell you all that my beautiful and cat crazy wife, has passed. I've had to cut this short due to character limits, sorry all. But, she did leave all of you a note, Reddit. I've copied everything verbatim below. She truly loved everyone and was smiling so much after her first post. I'll take my leave here. Much love.

"Reddit! If you're reading this, I am dead. Pretty crazy to be talking to a dead person, eh? It feels a bit strange to be writing this. If this feels a bit disconnected, I'm sorry. I have to take frequent breaks as I get tired pretty quickly now. My husband offered to write these words (such a sweet ham, I know. Be nice to him, okay?). But, I wanted my last words to be written by me. Long story short, we talked to my parents. A lot of people asked about why my husband wasn't planning the funeral and my parents were taking control. Honestly, my parents didn't take the news of my passing to come well and I suppose their closure(?) was to try and take control of what they could. I'm not angry at them for it, I understand. They had already pre-paid a large portion of the service and to put it plain and simple, it was a shit hand they were dealt. So, we talked to them. I laid it all out for them and somehow, we reached a compromise. Lots of tears. Lots of hugs. And surprisingly, lots of laughs. They admitted that they had been losing their faith with everything that had happened and their way to attempt to find it again was to take control and "guide me" into the afterlife. Not my thing though and I explained that I am not them, but their daughter who wanted to live her last weeks in peace, not the turmoil they were putting me through. And while a lot of people stated that funerals are for the living (true true), I firmly believe that a funeral is for the living to remember that person as WHO they were, not what anyone else wanted them to be. My parents seemed to understand when I told them that. They were not on board with the party favor aspect though, kind of a bummer. Pretty lucky to plan my own funeral, honestly. But, now that that is all said and done! Thank you, guys. I was blown away by the responses.I was moved to tears and I wish I had had the chance to meet every single one of you. You all be good now, ight? Take it one day at a time and fucking enjoy yourself! You only get one life, unless you're someone who has survived death than you're just a fucking hero and probably a cat with a few lives to spare. I love you all. I'm resting easy now. This disease sucks and I'm happy to be rid of it. And laugh and love and cry and be sad. Shit happens. I've got to go now, I'm gonna go snuggle my husband and my cats. Keep it real, Reddit. Love you, all!"
AITA for making my son deal with rotting meat
AITA for refusing to dye my daughter’s hair because her school complained?
AITA for telling my waitress's manager she did a great job?
AITA for what I said after my husband commented on my flat chest?
AITA for telling my to be granddaughter in law some lewd advice after my family asked for some ‘grandmotherly wisdom’?
AITA for prioritising my parrot over my stepdaughters wedding?
AITA for ignoring an autistic guy on my flight?
AITA for setting a glitter trap to catch my mother in law trying to snoop?
AITA for correcting every single sentence spoken by my boyfriend’s aunt in front of everyone?
AITA for making my oldest pay back a 3,000 dollar dress she ruined
AITA for yelling at my parents that their polyamory fucked up my childhood?
AITA for not telling my girlfriend that my parents are gay?
UPDATE: AITA for not letting my friend live in my spare room?
AITA for exposing my sister's lies about why she wanted a house keeper?
AITA for giving my child a "culturally inappropriate" name?
AITA for telling my husband I won't be cooking for him anymore because of the comment he made?
UPDATE: AITA for not wanting a ring my fiancé gave to another girl
AITA for not letting my cousin experience motherhood?
AITA for not speaking to my parents again after they put my cat down
AITA for telling a friend’s friend that he couldn’t keep the “jackpot” that he hit on my antique slot machine? (About $700)
AITA for leaving the call when my brother announced that his gf is pregnant?
AITA for dropping him and his daughter off at a rental car place states away from home?
AITA for telling my boyfriend that he can't date younger and then get upset about my budget apartment?
AITA for kicking my daughter out after she crossed a line?
UPDATE Am I the asshole for cutting up and altering my wedding dress into a functional dress insetad of giving it to my sister who can't afford it?
AITA for refusing to split rent with my boyfriend?
UPDATE: AITA for refusing to put my BF on the title of my house or make him a beneficiary
AITA for giving my son ~$15,000 when he turned 18 and moved out, but refuse to give the same amount to my daughter?
Update AITA for exposing my parents' favoritism
AITA for only going out to eat with my uncle after the rest of my family disagreed with my restaurant choice?
AITA for asking if my cousin made her first million yet?
AITA for being openly hostile towards my sister and telling on her thus potentially making her husband loose custody of his children?
AITA for saying no to picking up my sons half sister from school?
AITA for using flash cards to explain to my brother and his wife why they can't bring their rainbow baby to my wedding?
AITA for not taking my pregnant homophobic sister in?
AITA for kicking my girlfriend out of my place on New Year’s Eve for scaring my little brother?
AITA for lying about being pregnant to my family to protect my husband?
AITA for telling my brother in law he's a walking advertisement for abortion?
AITA for announcing the reason why I didn't invite my brother to my wedding and exposing him to the entire family?
AITA for refusing to leave my boyfriend's birthday party that I arranged for because his doctor friends wanted to discuss "Medical stuff"?
AITA For Firing An Employee After His Parents Died?
AITA for telling an employee she can choose between demotion or termination?
AITA for taking my Fiancè's dinner after he touched mine?
AITA for telling my daughter she cannot introduce her African American boyfriend to her grandparents?
AITA for going no-contact with my parents after learning they had lied to me about my allergies all my life?
AITA for telling my stepdaughter to stop using period products in the bathroom she shares with my teenage sons?
AITA for demanding respect from my DIL and if she can’t then get the fuck out
AITA for calling out step-family’s dirty laundry at Thanksgiving after they criticized me for being unmarried?
AITA for taking back my nephews Christmas present and giving it to my son.
AITA for sitting on my husband's lap during Thanksgiving dinner because all chairs at the table were taken?
META: Too many AITA commenters advocate too quickly for people to leave their partners at the first sign of conflict, and this kind of thinking deprives many people of emotional growth.
AITA for telling my husband off for wanting me to let my infertile BIL and his wife experience child birth by being with me in the delivery room?
AITA For Refusing to meet my sister on Christmas after she called CPS?
UPDATE:AITA for saying that my daughter’s best friend has to go to a doctor
UPDATE: AITA for telling my daughter she cannot marry a racist?
AITA for calling my grandma by wrong name until she gets my name right?
AITA for eating at the same restaurant as my husband’s family?
AITA - For giving my husband only 3 days to return my jewelry set that he he gave his brother's wife as a wedding gift?
AITA for getting back the money my husband took from our IVF treatment and gave to his friend?
AITA for asking my husband to turn down his dream job for my career?
AITA for getting my family to do a "swear tax" after my dad told me off for swearing? (My dad and brothers cuss like sailors but apparently me cussing is unladylike?)
AITA for leaving my inlaws christmas dinner after I found out that they didn't make accommodations for me?
AITA for making my stepson walk on his engagement night?
AITA for not wanting my disabled sister at my wedding?
AITA for letting my toddler destroy 200$?
AITA for leaving after being told to be quiet at dinner?
AITA for not punishing my 7 yo daughter for her play-relationships?
AITA For tricking my parents into being on time for my wedding.
AITA for sneaking out of the restaurant after my fiance told me to pay for his and his friends meal?
AITA for disinviting my brother to my wedding after he told me “being gay is wrong”?
AITA for cutting up and altering my wedding dress into a functional dress instead of giving it to my sister who can't afford an expensive dress?
AITA I got mad at my wife because she caused me to fail an important interview
AITA For Not Baking Much For My Family
AITA for accidentally calling out a new colleague on lying about her language skills?
AITA for calling my brother a “disgusting gross, man,” at his daughter’s birthday party?
AITA For not punishing my daughter for mocking her cousin?
AITA for telling my soon-to-be niece that she doesn't need to wear a dress to my wedding?
AITA for wanting to go to the funeral of a girl that I helped get addicted to drugs?
UPDATE: AITA for telling everyone to leave me the fuck alone?
AITA for my response to my sister's boyfriend's "brutal honesty"?
AITA for having security at my mother's funeral, having certain people barred entry?
AITA For demanding my fiancé and his mom to pay for a new wedding address?
AITA for getting my interviewer fired?
AITA for telling my Inlaws exactly where my husband was when I was in labor?
AITA for throwing them out of a house that we own. Son and future In-Laws decide to exclude his family from wedding. They thought son owned the house not us.
AITA For building a Fence and blocking my neighbours from the road, forcing them to take a massive detour?
AITA for kicking my sister out of our family dinner after she made a "practical observation"?
AITA for taking off my leg and making someone look dumb and feel uncomfortable?
UPDATE: AITA for Trying to Send my Deaf Daughter to a School that Won't Hire an Interpreter?
AITA for telling my son he can't stay with me when I found out why his wife kicked him out.
(UPDATE) AITA for being upset that my husband used my bonus on him?
AITA for making my SIL feel like shit about her weight?
AITA for prioritizing my son's dog over my wife's pregnancy?
AITA for banning my husband’s female friend from our house?
AITA for telling my daughter that I absolutely do not support her ONLY wanting to be a Stay-At-Home-Mom?
AITA for kicking my friend out the car?
AITA for canceling the plans for thanksgiving after my parents called my brother’s baby their “first grandchild”?
AITA for giving my MIL a fake copy of my house key and "exposing" her on Christmas dinner?
AITA For Moving Out Cause My Family Keeps Playing With My Cane?
UPDATE - AITA for allowing my 8 year old to shave her head?
AITA for getting mad at my mum for making my girlfriend sleep on the floor?
AITA for telling my sister to stop telling people that she has my illness to gain sympathy for being overweight?
AITA for refusing to visit my dad after my room was converted to an office/bedroom?
AITA For walking out of my father's funeral?
AITA for leaving my best friend and his friends stranded in an unfamiliar city?
AITA for telling a woman who lives in my complex that yes having her husband check me out turns me on?
AITA for sabotaging my little brother's food on purpose?
I am a nurse practitioner and I am the primary care provider for a lot of the low risk maternity cases at the practice where I work.  I also work hand in hand with the doctors and midwives to create a healthy maternity, birth, and postpartum situation. 

My fiancee is completing her residency.  We live together and have for a few years now.  We aren't in any hurry to get married.  We originally had plans to do so a couple of years ago but then we got really busy for two years.  

It is driving my very religious parents crazy that their youngest son is living in sin.  I don't really care.  I'm an adult and I do what I want.  We are getting married in June.  

So we are visiting my parents for Christmas. The way it came together this year everyone is at my parents house.  So that's my folks, my three siblings, myself and fiancee, and seven grandchildren.  So seventeen people.  

At dinner my mom starts going on about how she is so glad that we are finally getting married and she won't be embarrassed at church any more.  And my dad says how proud he is of his three older kids who all either waited to get married before moving in together or got married right away after moving in together.  My fiancee was getting embarrassed and I was getting mad over this stupid argument we have had too many times. And a family dinner was the last straw.  

I have asked them repeatedly to just accept that they cannot control how I live my life.  I refuse to stay with them when I visit even if I come alone.  Hotels are just easier.  

So I started talking about a premature baby I had been reading about.  It was almost three months premature and weighed about 1.6 pounds. It was super strong and healthy for being born so little and the NICU had high hopes for the baby doing well.  

My mom and dad both got deer in the headlights looks on their faces.  To bad. Should not have fucked around with my fiancee's feelings.  

So I asked about my oldest brother.  He was born almost four months premature.  Is there a chance that we could check out the family album where we keep all the records of family births and stuff.  

I already know my brother was over 9 pounds and almost 23" long when he was born.  My grandmother told me all about it the first time my parents tried to shame me. 

The subject gets changed very fast.  After supper my parents told me that I should not try to embarrass them with private things that are not my concern.  I told them that if I heard anything about my living arrangements ever again for the rest of my life I would make sure to keep bringing up the FACT that my mom was in her second trimester when they got married.

My parents are mad at me for telling them how to behave in their own home.  But my fiancee is happy that they seem to be off the subject for good.  

AITA?
AITA for refusing to get on a flight?
AITA for my sister ending her pregnancy and possibly her marriage?
UPDATE: AITA for changing the package pickup each time someone uses my email for orders?
AITA for letting my MIL and SIL find our (hubby's and mine) bedroom toys because I suspected they snooped in my drawers?
AITA for telling my wife that we're BOTH pregnant?
AITA for disinviting my siblings from my wedding
AITA for demanding my husband to pay me the $1000 dollars he spent behind my back?
UPDATE WIBTA For planting prickly bushes in my front yard to keep the neighbours kids from my property?
AITA for not asking my MIL nicely to hand over the baby for feeding?
AITA for kicking my sister out of my family gathering after comment about adopted son?
AITA for catfishing my underaged sister on Tinder and humiliating her in order to teach her a lesson?
AITA for not marrying the girl I'm supposed to be and causing major problems for my family?
AITA for speaking Italian to my GF's rude Italian American family and embarrassing them?
AITA for losing it and telling in-laws to stop calling me “mama” and trying to erase my identity?
AITA for ruining thanksgiving?
AITA for jumping out of a bathroom window to avoid my mom’s attempt at forcing a reunion between me and my ex fiancé?
AITA for very rarely/almost never wanting to go to restaurants because my girlfriend makes food that's just as good, if not better, than restaurant food?
AITA for inviting my (29M) Girlfriend (28F) on an expensive vacation and expecting her to pay all of her share? (I make a lot more than her)
UPDATE to AITA for telling my disabled son and his partner I disapprove of their relationship?
AITA for kicking out my sister after she sabotaged a meeting with a fertility clinic?
[UPDATE] for yelling at my ex's GF in front of kids?
AITA for not letting my sister in law hold our baby?
AITA for not giving up my second "free" seat next to me in the plane?
AITA for evicting my sister and her daughters after the hid my wife's wig and embarrassed her?
AITA for telling my son exactly what my husband did despite him begging me not to tell?
AITA for making my daughter sleep in the backyard after what she did to our housemaid?
AITA for refusing to to let my husband's infertile friend name our son?
UPDATE: AITA for sleeping top naked in my bedroom?
AITA? I flipped out on my fiancèe for selling the gaming chair my brother gifted me to pay for her gym membership.
AITA for exposing the real reason my sister and her bf broke up.
AITA? My husband and I are getting my stepson a car for his birthday. His mother wants to chip in and say that the car is from all of us, but I don’t want to do that.
AITA for tricking my husband into eating the food I cooked by making him think his mom sent it?
AITA for getting high so my relatives don't try and pawn their children on me?
AITA: For not wanting to hide my period from my step-brothers like my step-mum wants me too?
AITA for not apologising to my roommate’s girlfriend because she saw me naked?
WIBTA if I ask my pregnant wife to move out because she and her best friend decided to "test" my loyalty?
AITA for gifting my sister pictures of my dog?
AITA for my response after my BIL said my dress was inappropriate for a family gathering?
AITA for telling my husband he exaggerated when he said my kids ruined his daughter's birthday?
AITA For my reaction when my 30yo fiancè exchanged his gift with my 16yo brother?.
AITA for pretending not to recognize my parents when they tried to reconnect?
AITA for asking my wife to have an abortion
UPDATE: AITA for refusing to give my newborn’s social security number to my aunt.
AITA for blowing up at my husband for messing with my alarm and causing me to miss my exam?
UPDATE: AITA for not agreeing to house my pregnant teenage sister and her delinquent boyfriend after our parents disowned her?
AITA for saying that my daughter inherits my house "no matter what"?
AITA for not accommodating my brother's vegan fiancee?
AITA for telling people my sister had an abortion.
AITA for telling my friend that she is only welcome at my house if she doesn't bring her husband
AITA for giving my ex wife a large amount of money I won despite the anger of my gf?
Update: AITA for not making coffee how my fiance wants me to
AITA I went with my friend to a restaurant that was originally reserved for me and my wife.
AITA for suing my biological father for unpaid child support?
AITA for still going to my dental appointment after my husband tried to get me to reschedule?
AITA for not letting my miracle baby niece be my flower girl at my wedding?
AITA for refusing to give "back" a gift that my boyfriend's daughter (13) had already refused to accept?
AITA for being peeved about surprise tooth extractions during neutering
AITA for refusing to stay home with the kids while my husband attends my brother's wedding?
AITA For telling my wife that if she wants to bedshare she needs to sleep in the kids beds?
AITA for "demanding" my GF to change her dress for a wedding?
AITA for showing my missing eye to the new teacher after he told me my bangs are disrespectful?
AITA for making a girl cry by calling her fat when she was roasting me for being skinny?
AITA for pretending to be an "Appletarian" (eating only apple derived foods/drinks) for 3 weeks as a prank, causing my friends to have an intervention for me?
AITA for staying true to my threats after my dad died?
AITA for giving my son a bill for half his expenses?
AITA for refusing to train with a Nazi?
AITA for pushing off a girl my lap and making her cry?
AITA for refusing to pay for my sister's husband's surgery with my inheritance/college money?
AITA for mocking my brother for getting rejected by his dream college (that I got into) because he keeps tormenting me over it?
UPDATE: A month ago I was told I WBTA for not telling a date about my plans to be a single mother, so I told him
AITA for sending my son to school in a dress
AITA for not wanting my parents to adopt another teenage girl
AITA for not giving my brother and his wife any privacy?
AITA for refusing to sell my horse?
UPDATE: WIBTA if I sue my SIL for stealing my book and making a huge profit from it?
AITA? My mom is an influencer. I am sick of being a part of it, I had "NO PHOTOS" hoodies printed for me and my little sister.
AITA for not telling my parents how to read my diary?
AITA for spraying the neighborhood kids with my garden hose?
AITA for uninviting my cousin, brother, uncle and dad to my wedding over a prank?
[UPDATE] AITA for not telling my wife that I am dying?
AITA for calling my sister a cokewhore?
AITA for laughing uncontrollably at my son when he asked me to replace a Christmas gift he broke out of anger?
AITA For calling my co-worker "chunky" after she repeatedly calls me "slim" and makes references to my weight after I asked her multiple times not to.
AITA for reporting my classmates for joking that I have pretty privilege?
AITA for telling my son that village you wanted doesn’t exist since you burnt it to the ground
AITA for telling my daughter to cancel her marriage?
AITA for cancelling my son's birthday party upon discovering that he ruined his stepbrother's deceased brother's hoodie?
[UPDATE] AITA for asking my boyfriend to charge his family member for fraud?
AITA for teaching my (20M) niece (4F) to say "el chupacabra"when her mom (32F) says "you know what really gets my goat?"
AITA for bringing my garden with me when I moved?
AITA for refusing to ''see other options'' for a girl and pressing charges for what she did to my son's car?
AITA for moving back out after my parents demanded I follow their rules
AITA for refusing to give my niece our dog's room?
AITA for cutting off my family over my mom's will?
AITA for kicking my pregnant girlfriend out of my house when I found out the child wasn't mine?
AITA for telling my girlfriend’s friend to watch her mouth when she insinuated that my girlfriend isn’t a real woman?
AITA for not letting my girlfriend wear her “unique” dress to a wedding?
AITA for telling my wife she was "so close" to getting her dream job?
AITA for calling my wife unreasonable for backing out of spending Christmas with my family after my mother rejected her cookie sample"?
AITA for getting up from my chair in the middle of christmas dinner and shouting "SHUT THE FUCK UP ABOUT MY BODYYYYY" in response to my husband's observation?
AITA for doing weird/awkward poses whenever my MIL "accidently" walks in on me in the bathroom?
AITA for going home after I got told to sleep on the floor?
AITA for throwing my sister and her son out of my house?
AITA for giving my son's new bike away after the "prank" he pulled on a girl he was friends with?
AITA for not allowing my father to meet my dying mother at the hospital?
AITA for cancelling mother's day celebration that I arranged for my wife after hearing what she told my son?
AITA for buying my wife a Roomba for Christmas?
AITA? I reported my car missing after my husband took it to attend his brother's wedding.
AITA for saying my sister needs to stop bringing up her miscarriage for attention?
AITA for wanting to tell my brother's fiancée about the tracking app he secretly installed in the new phone he bought for her?
UPDATE: AITA For Leaving a Vacation I Planned for my GF After Her Friends Came Along?
AITA for kicking this girl out of my house after she mistook my UK flag for a confedrate flag? And was planning to get us fired from our jobs?
AITA for saying "I dunno man, lesbians."?
AITA for disowning my brother for abandoning a girl after getting her pregnant?
AITA for lying to my boyfriend about when an event starts?
AITA - I have Stage IV Cancer and said “no shit” to what I thought was in-laws weird /insensitive comment.
AITA for putting parental controls on my TV and royally pissing off my FIL?
AITA for believing the house keeper over my son?
AITA for telling my sister to stop using the word family on me like it's supposed to mean something?
AITA For Offering A Drink To A Girl In A Bar And Then Not Paying For It?
UPDATE: AITA for asking my grieving husband if he has feelings for his best friend?
AITA for packing my kid an “inappropriate” lunch?
AITA for taking my daughter and leaving the wedding after her stepbrother pulled her wig?
AITA for refusing to give this woman her grandma's wedding dress and jewelry back?
AITA for refusing to be in my father's wedding even tho I "cheated too"?
AITA for refusing to apologize to my husband in writing after I cancelled all his family invitations to a Christmas celebration at our house?
AITA for refusing to share a room with a 1yr old, twin 2yr olds and a 4yr old?
AITA For laughing my ass off at my wife's expense?
AITA for calling him a "fucking embarrassment"?
AITA for blowing up at my friend who constantly makes comments about my boobs?
UPDATE - AITA for very rarely/almost never wanting to go to restaurants because my girlfriend makes food that's just as good, if not better, than restaurant food?
AITA for 'forcing' my son to wait to marry his then high-school girlfriend?
AITA for yelling at my mom that I hate Harry Potter and to LET ME LIVE MY OWN LIFE
AITA for ruining my brother's date night and having him come pick his 3yo son up after he dropped him off at my house right before my shift?
I'll try to keep this short. I had a [1967 Impala 4 door](https://i.imgur.com/HLBPpTF.jpg) that I bought in Feb 2019. A couple months ago I bought my first house that had a 2.5 car garage. I moved the car in and started tearing it down for a complete restoration. I had the body in one bay and the chassis in another, plus the whole garage filled with parts. About two months ago my girlfriend came to live with me during this whole crisis and the whole time has hated that car. She wants to park in the garage but I have 2 acres of land with a lot of nice places to park under shady trees or hell even in the barn if it has to be inside. I tell her tough luck its my house and its not like I can just throw it back together real quick. Anyways I was out of town for a couple days on a business trip for the small local company I work for. When I got back, my girlfriend was all smiles. Making me food all the time, doing all the chores, all that. I though maybe she just was happy to have me home but then I realized that I didn't see her car in it's usual spot. I asked her where she parked so I could make sure I mow that area and keep it clean and she said not to worry because she parked in the garage. I asked how and she told me to go check it out. Turns out that while I was gone she hired some people to come over and move everything related to that car, including the drivetrain, body, and chassis and all parts, and take it to the local dump/scrapyard. I was absolutely dumbfounded. I had spent over 11k on that car including new parts, services, and the car itself. I told her that I was going to be taking her to court for that and she brushed me off like I was being dramatic. I told her that its done between us and to pack her things and leave. I admit I was a really angry but I did end up getting a lawyer, and as I have all the receipts for all that money spent and I have her on my house's security cam footage letting the guys in and watching them take it all I think I can win. Her family and friends are absolutely blowing me up saying its just a stupid old piece of junk and that she cannot pay back all that money I spent, and that I should just let it go. But I have been putting all my time, effort, and money into that car for a year and a half now and goddammit if I am not going to get justice for what she did. AITA

Edit: Thank you all so much for the support and awards and everything. I'm glad I have some people on my side. I got a call from her mom about 20 minutes ago and she told me that i was ruining her daughter's life over a stupid car. I told her she ruined her own life. I've been gathering documentation and stuff and I'm about to head down to the police station and file a report, as suggested by lots here. Once again thank you all

UPDATE : went to the police station last night, was told to come back in the morning. just got back and filed an official report against her for grand larceny and grand theft auto. i showed them all the receipts i had for the car and the footage of her letting the guys come and take it as well as the title for the vehicle in my name. they said they will be in contact with all 3 parties (me, ex gf, and junkyard guys) soon and they will hopefully be able to recover some or all of the car. just have to wait now

HUGE UPDATE : THEY FOUND MY GODDAMN CAR!! the junkyard guys apparently were in the middle of hiding it when the police came to ask them questions. it was on a forklift and they were gonna put it on top of a pile of cars that was hidden behind more piles of cars. they said it was theirs and they had the title, but obviously didnt have the title for it and since they matched the vin on the chassis and body to the vin on my title, it was obviously mine. I know at least one person there has been arrested, i think he was in the camera footage i talked about earlier but idk if it was the boss or whomever or even his specific charge, they also told me they would be looking into this specific junkyard for any other vehicles reported stolen. they said they haven't been able to get in contact with my ex just yet but they're working on it. im just so glad they found my car. luckily i made quite an album of pictures detailing me tearing down the car and so i can use that to prove what parts they had were mine so i can hopefully get most or all of it back. police haven't let me take it back home yet as they say it is evidence or something so hopefully i can get it back eventually. thank you all so much for the support and advice! SHES GONNA BE ALRIGHT
AITA for telling my wife the lock on my daughter's door does not get removed til my brother inlaw and his daughters are out of our house?
AITA for bringing my SIL’s wallet to the restaurant when she conveniently always forgets it?
AITA for making a punny "wall of shame" for people who stole from my mom's garden?
AITA for "hacking" my moms instagram to see if she violated NDA?
AITA for telling my drywall guy to stop bugging my babysitter?
AITA: For uninviting my sister to my wedding for what she told my fiancèe?
