Article 14
     Mr. Vice-President : We come to new article 14.
(Amendment No. 504 was not moved.)
     Shri H. V. Kamath: What about 13-A? That is, amendments 89, 90 and 92 of List V.
     Mr. Vice-President: That has been held over. I was referring to No. 504.
     Now the motion is:
     "That article 14 form part of the Constitution."
     Honourable Members have been supplied with a list which indicates the manner in which I propose to conduct the proceedings of the House. No. 505 has been disallowed as being verbal. 506 may be moved.
     Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava: May I take the liberty of pointing out that my amendment (No. 505) is not mercy verbal? It is an amendment of substance also.
     Mr. Vice-President: Then I will give my ruling later on. Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad will carry on his work.
     Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal: Muslim): Mr. Vice-President, I beg to move:
     "That in clause (1) of article 14, after the words "greater than", the words "or of a kind other than" be inserted."
     Sir, clause (1) provides--I am reading only the material part--
     "No person shall be subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law at the time of the commission of the offence."
     It guards against any punishment `greater than' is provide to be inflicted upon a person. I have attempted to insert after the words `greater than' the words `or other than' that which might have been inflicted. There are many cases where a punishment of fine only is provided. Suppose a man is fined one lakh of rupees. An Appellate Court may turn it to an imprisonment during the sitting of the Court. That will violate the provision that where fine alone is provided for, an imprisonment may be substituted on the ground that it is not 'greater than' that. My amendment seeks to limit the powers of Courts to inflict punishment not only as to the extent but also to the kind. There are different kinds of punishments--fine, imprisonment, whipping, forfeiture and hanging and the like where only a particular kind of punishment is specifically provided, you should not award any punishment other than that. That is in short the effect of this amendment. Where whipping alone is provided, You cannot award a fine. Where fine alone is provided, you cannot award imprisonment or whipping or forfeiture. Where forfeiture of movables only a provided, you cannot forfeit immovables. Where forfeiture of articles relating to which crime has been committed is provided, you cannot forfeit other kinds of things. So if we leave the powers of the courts as in the clause it gives the Court the power to give any punishment not sanctioned by law. If clause (1) is to be retained, the Court should also be limited to the class of punishment provided. To me it seems that there is here a lacuna-rather oversight which should be corrected.
     Mr. Vice-President: As regards amendment No. 505, I can allow the Member to move the second part of it. Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava.
     Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Sir, I beg to move.
     "That in clause (1) of article 14, for the words `under the law at the time of the commission' the words `under the law in force at the time of the commission' be substituted."
     Sir, if you kindly examine the definition of the expression 'law in force' as given in the explanation under article 307, it would appear that the words `the law' and the words 'the law in force' have different meanings. Moreover as the words in the previous part of the article also appear as 'law in force', it is very necessary and proper in this juxtaposition that the amendment that I have suggested should be accepted. That is all I have to submit.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment Nos. 507, 508 and 511 are of the same import. The most comprehensive one, i. e, No.507, may be moved.
(Amendments Nos. 507, 508 and 511 were not moved.)
     Amendments Nos. 509 and 510 are of similar import and may be moved together. They are in the name of Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad.
     Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, I beg to move:
     "That at the end of clause (2) of article 14, the words "otherwise than as permitted by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898" be added."
     Sir, I am moving these amendments with considerbale anxiety in my mind. The first anxiety is that I may perhaps over step my time limit; they second anxiety is that there are a large number of observant and powerful eyes directed against me and I am afraid that a point of order may be taken at any time; and the third anxiety is the huge 'No' against me will be echoed by honourable Members and this will reverberate as thunder clap under which my feeble 'Aye' will be lost.
     Then the other difficulty is that I have to crave the indulgent attention of the Honourable the Chairman of the Drafting Committee to the point I am raising. I shall restrict my point strictly to the limits of relevancy.
     Sir, the words which I seek to insert deals with an important principle of criminal procedure. Clause (2) which I seek to amend runs as follows:
     "(2) No person shall be punished for the same offence more than once."
     A very sacred sentiment has prompted the introduction of this clause; but considered from the point of view of criminal law, it has its loop-holes.
     Clause (2) seems to be rather sweeping. There are cases where a man may be legally punished twice for the same offence, and I shall submit the circumstances, with the relevant laws. Sir, the principal which deals with this subject finds a place in section 403, sub-section (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The point of this. The law of punishment twice has been enacted.
     Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: Sir, on a point of order. Can any Member of this House move an amendment referring to an enactmente  itself is out of order.
     Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: Anything else may be out of order, but not the amendment. We have already referred to and saved `existing laws'--enactments of subordinate legislatures in article 9 and in other places. I was only referring for handy consideration to the Criminal Procedure Code. I cannot pretend to submit that Section 403, or any principle embodied in it, or any sound principle even is binding upon this House, not even the soundest of propositions, because this is a sovereign House.
     I was submitting for consideration certain principles of the Criminal Procedure, not that I suggested at all that they will be binding on this House, but only that they worthy of consideration.
     Sir, it often happens--I shall submit examples from general principles because I think they would be more acceptable to Mr. Krishnamachari--it often happens that a man is punished by a Court which has no jurisdiction; It is a very ordinary experience in criminal Courts that the Judge on appeal or the High Court or the Privy Council--and now the Federal Court and later on the future Supreme Court--may and does find that the conviction is without jurisdiction. Meantime, the man has been convicted. If you say that he cannot be convicted twice, then orders of re-trial by appellate and revisional Courts would be absolutely out of the question. If a man is tried by a Magistrate or a Court having no jurisdiction, and if he is punished, that is the first punishment.
     And then if it is found that the Court had no jurisdiction to try the case, what is often done is that there is a re-trial. But if you enact the principle of clause (2) that a man shall not be punished for the same offence more than once, the effect would be that if a man is punished by a Court of competent jurisdiction but there is a lacuna in the trial, or by a Court of competent jurisdiction the result will be to shut out any further trial at all. Are-trial after a conviction is an ordinary incident of daily experience in criminal Courts.
     Sometimes, Sir,............
     (After a pause)
     Sir, I desire to monopolise the attention of the Honourable Member the Chairman of the Drafting Committee; otherwise it will be useless to argue. If he says "No", the whole House will echo him.
     Mr. Vice-President: Dr. Ambedkar, Mr. Naziruddin demands your wholehearted attention. He says that if you say "No", the House will say "No". (Laughter).
     Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: The point which I was submitting is a point of general importance. The point is that if a man is convicted by a court of law--that is the first conviction--it may be that there is some lacuna in the trial. The accused appeals to the Court of Sessions. The Court finds that there was a lacuna in the trial or that the Court had no jurisdiction. But it may order a re-trial. Clause (2) which would effectively prevent further trial because it may involve a second conviction. There may be a first conviction of an offender in the hands of a Court, and this clause will effectively prevent a re-trial order by a superior court. This is one of the simplest examples. The principle should be not merely convicted, but the principle should be that a man cannot be tried again, tried twice, if he is acquitted or convicted by a Court of competent jurisdiction, while the conviction or acquittal stands effective. In fact, it is not the first conviction that is important; it is the ultimate legality and finality of the conviction that has to be respected; the finality should attach not only to conviction but also to acquittal. What are you going to do with regard to a person who is finally acquitted after a fair trial, and when the acquittal is not set aside and is therefore final and binding? You say nothing about that. You simply say that a man should not be convicted twice for the same offence. A man acquitted shall also not be liable to be tried again. You say nothing about that but confine you attention to the bogey of double punishment. I submit that the so-called theory of double punishment is not all and does not give a complete picture. Take for example, a man fined Rs. 50 for an offence by a Magistrate having no jurisdiction; then he appeals to an appellate Court. The appellate Court will, by virtue of clause (2) be precluded from sending it for re-trial on any technical ground, even on the ground that the Court had no jurisdiction.
     The relevant section which caused some amount of suspicion in the mind of a distinguished Member of the House, Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari, I shall with his permission and with your permission, Sir, and with the permission of the House, read. Not that it is binding, but it is a crystallised wisdom which has been handed down to us from generation to generation. Sub-section (1) of section 403 says:
     "A person who has been once tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction for an offence and convicted or acquitted of such offence, shall, while such conviction or acquittal remains in force, not be liable to be tried again for the same offence".
     I think, Sir, this is the proper form. It may be argued that the Criminal Procedure Code is a sufficient safeguard against injustice, but if you introduce it here it is a justiciable right, and we have already provided that any violation of any fundamental right is justiciable and would nullify all existing laws contrary, and therefore it will have the effect of abolishing or rather nullifying the wholesome law as laid down in sub-section (1) of section 403. I submit that the clause has got to be very carefully considered and, if necessary, should be re-drafted.
     I submit that double punishment for the same offence in such cases does not in fact work injustice. What happens in such cases is that the punishment already suffered or inflicted is taken into account or adjusted in giving the final punishment in a re-trial. That is the effect of this amendment.
     Mr. Vice-President: Do you intend to move amendment No.509?
     Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: No, Sir. It deals with the same principle and I do not wish to move it.
     Mr. Vice-President: I have found from the last two days' experience that 9.30 a.m. is too early an hour for many Members of the House. They seem to think that others will come at the proper time and they need not come, with the result that there is difficulty in starting our work at the proper time. I have therefore decided that from tomorrow we shall start at 10 a.m. and break up at 1.30 p.m.
     The Assembly then adjourned till Ten of the Clock on Friday the 3rd December, 1948.
  Honourable Members: Certainly.
                                                       DRAFT CONSTITUTION-contd.
                                                                              Article 14-contd.
      Mr. Vice-President : We shall now resume discussion of article 14. Amendment 510 was moved. 509 will be put to vote. So we next come to 512.
     Kazi Syed Karimuddin (C. P. & Berar: Muslim): Mr. Vice-President, Sir, I beg to move--
     That in article 14, the following be added as clause (4):--
"(4) The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated and no warrants shall issue but upon probable cause supported by oath or affirmation and particularly describing the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized."
     This is a very important amendment. You will be pleased to find that this finds place as article 4 in the American Constitution and in the Irish Constitution there are clauses(2) and (5) which are similar and in the German Constitution there are articles 114 and 115 on the same lines. In the book of Dr. Ambedkar--Minorities and States--on page 11, item No. 10, a similar provision has been made. Thus, this is an amendment, the correctness of which cannot be challenged. What is the situation in India today? In India, in practically every province, there are Goonda Act and Public Safety Act which do not provide for any appeals or representations, and which give no opportunity to the persons concerned to defend themselves. Arrests are made without warrant and searches without justification. We are being governed by lawless laws and there is no remedy for the redress of grievances on account of unauthorised arrests and searches.
     We have seen in 1947, and in the beginning of 1948, that hundreds of thousands of people were arrested and houses were searched merely on suspicion. The result is that the morale of the members of the Muslim minority community was undermined and they were treated just like criminals in the country. I will give the house one very important instance. Whenever we went to an aerodrome to go to Delhi, our belongings were searched without any reason, without any cause and without any warning. I will now give another instance. When there was police action in Hyderabad, every Muslim worth the name was arrested without any justification in the adjoining provinces. If those Muslims were really traitors they ought to have been prosecuted, punished and hanged. But people who had nothing whatever to do with Hyderabad were arrested under the pretence that they were taken only under protective custody. Well, if they were taken only under protective custody, why were their women and children who were outside not taken under this protective custody?
     Therefore my submission is that unless this fundamental right that I have asked for in this amendment is guaranteed, there will be no end to these arrests without warrants and to these searches without justifications. I have moved this amendment in the earnest hope that it would be accepted.
     Mr. Vice-President: The next amendment in the List is the one standing in the name of Mr. Kakkan.
     Shri P. Kakkan (Madras: General): Sir, I do not want to move it. But, with your permission I wish to speak on it.
     Mr. Vice-President: That I cannot permit. I can give the honourable Member an opportunity to speak in the course of the general discussion on article 14. I think, as there are no other amendments to this article, the House can now take up the general discussion of this article. Mr. Kakkan may now make the speech he wanted to.
     Shri P. Kakkan: Mr. Vice-President, I had given notice of an amendment to this article only with a view to speak on it.
     Sir, what I have got to say concerns the jail administration. In the jails they make a distinction between prisoners and prisoners in allotting duties in the jails. If a prisoner belongs to the Harijan community he is compelled to do scavenging work, no matter what his class or rank or education is. Prisoners belonging to other communities are not similarly forced to do scavenging work. On this occasion I desire to express my opinion and my feeling that this distinction in the matter of the allotment of work to prisoners inside the jails should be removed forthwith. Sir, I know from experience that the members of the Harijan community are treated in jails very cruelly, as if they are God's creatures and that He created them for doing scavenging work. I earnestly hope that this distinction will be removed hereafter and that Harijans will get impartial treatment everywhere. It is with this object that I have stated in my amendment that no person convicted for any offence shall be compelled to work in jail (caste war) in respect of religion, caste, race or class. I thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to speak.
     Shri T. T. Krishnamachari (Madras: General): Mr. Vice-President, Sir, the point I have to place before the House happens to be a comparatively narrow one. In this article 14, clause (2) reads thus: `No person shall be punished for the same offence more than once'. It has been pointed out to me by more Members of this House that this might probably affect cases where, as in the case of an official of Government who has been dealt with departmentally and punishment has been inflicted, he cannot again be prosecuted and punished if he had committed a criminal offence; or, per contra, if a Government official had been prosecuted and sentenced to imprisonment or fine by a court, it might preclude the Government from taking disciplinary action against him. Though the point is a narrow one and one which is capable of interpretation whether this provision in this particular clause in the Fundamental Rights will affect the discretion of Government acting under the rules of conduct and discipline in regard to its own officers, I think, when we are putting a ban on a particular type of action, it is better to make the point more clear.
     I recognise that I am rather late now to move an amendment. What I would like to do is to word the clause thus: `No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once." If my Honourable Friend Dr. Ambedkar will accept the addition of the words `prosecuted and' before the word 'punished' and if you, Sir, and the House will give him permission to do so, it will not merely be a wise thing to do but it will save a lot of trouble for the Governments of the future. That is the suggestion I venture to place before the House. It is for the House to deal with it in whatever manner it deems fit.
     Mr. Vice-President: Does the House give the permission asked for by Shri T. T. Krishnamachari?
     Honourable Members: Yes.
     Mr. Vice-President: Now I will call upon Dr. Ambedkar to move the amendment suggested by Shri T. T. Krishnamachari.
     The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Mr. Vice-President, Sir, with regard to the amendments that have been moved to this article, I can say that I am prepared to accept the amendment moved by Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari. Really speaking, the amendment is not necessary but as certain doubts have been expressed that the word `punished' may be interpreted in a variety of ways, I think it may be desirable to add the words "prosecuted and punished".
     With regard to amendments Nos. 506 and 509 moved by my friend, Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad...........,
     Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: It is No. 510.
     The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Anyhow, I have examined the position the whole day yesterday and I am satisfied that no good will be served by accepting these amendments. I am however prepared to accept amendment No.512 moved by Mr. Karimuddin. I think it is a useful provision and may find a place in our Constitution. There is nothing novel in it because the whole of the clause as suggested by him is to be found an the Criminal Procedure Code so that it might be said in a sense that this is already the law of the land. It is perfectly possible that the legislatures they are so important so far as personal liberty is concerned that it is very desirable to place these provisions beyond the reach of the legislature and I am therefore prepared to accept his amendment.
     With regard to amendment No. 513 moved by my friend, Mr. Kakkan......
     An Honourable Member: It was not moved.
     Mr. Vice-President: What about amendments Nos. 505 and 506?
     The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I have already said that I am not prepared to accept amendment Nos. 506 and 510.
     Mr. Vice-President: Have you anything to say about amendment No. 505, the second part of it as modified by amendment No. 92 in List V? Perhaps you have overlooked it. It is in the name of Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava.
     The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I accept the amendment moved by him.
     Mr. Vice-President : I am putting the amendments one by one to the vote.
     Amendment No. 505 as modified by amendment No. 92 of List V. I understand that Dr. Ambedkar accepts it. The question is:
     "That in clause (1) of article 14, for the words `under the law at the time of the commission' the words `under the law in force at the time of the commission' be substituted."
The amendment was adopted.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment No. 506. The question is:
     "That in clause (1) of article 14, after the words' greater than' the words 'or of a kind other than' be inserted."
The amendment was negatived.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment No. 510. The question is:
     "That at the end of clause (2) of article 14, the words other wise than as permitted by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898' be added."
The amendment was negatived.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment No. 512 moved by Kazi Syed Karimuddin and accepted by Dr. Ambedkar. The question is:
     That in article 14, the following be added as clause(4):--
"(4) The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated and no warrants shall issue but upon probable cause supported by oath or affirmation and particularly describing the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized."
     I think the 'Ayes' have it.
     Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: The Noes have it.
     Mr. Vice-President: I will again put it to the vote.
     I think the `Ayes' have it.
     Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: No, Sir, the Noes have it.
     Mr. Vice-President: I shall first of all call for a show of hands.
(The Division Bell was rung.)
     Shri Mahavir Tyagi (United Provinces: General): May I propose that this question might be postponed for the time being and a chance be given for the Members to confer between themselves and arrive at a decision. Even the British House of Commons, sometimes converts itself into a committee to give various parties a chance to confer and arrive at an agreed solution.
     Mr. Vice-President: I am prepared to postpone the voting on this amendment provided the House gives me the requisite permission. I would request the House to be calm. This is not the way to come to decisions which must be reached through co-operative effort and through goodwill. Does the House give me the necessary power to postpone voting on this?
     The Honourable Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru : Mr. Vice-President, Sir, as apparently a slight confusion has arisen in many members' minds on this point, I think, Sir, that the suggestion made is eminently desirable, that we might take up this matter a little later, and we may proceed with other things. It will be the wish of the House that will prevail of course. I would suggest to you, Sir, and to the House that your suggestion be accepted.
     Dr. B. V. Keskar (United Provinces: General): Can it be done after the division bell has rung?
     Mr. Vice-President: I never go by technicalities. I shall continue to use common-sense as long as I am here. I have little knowledge of technicalities, but I have some knowledge of human nature. I know that in the long run it is good sense, it is common-sense, it is goodwill which alone will carry weight. I ask the permission of the House to postpone the voting.
     Honourable Members: Yes.
Article 15
      Mr. Vice-President: Then we shall pass on to the next article. The next amendment is No. 514 but as Mr. Lari is absent, I shall pass on to the next article.
     Shri T. T. Krishnamachari : May I suggest that discussion of this article be postponed, as it is being examined and the Members of the House would like to take some more time for the consideration of this particular article?
Article 15-A
     Mr. Vice-President : Very well: Then I pass on to article 15-A (New article). Amendment No. 534 seeks to rule out capital punishment. I think it is blocked in view of the fact that a similar amendment was put to vote and rejected.
(Amendments Nos. 535 and 536 were not moved.)
Article 16
      Mr. Vice-President : The motion before the House is that article 16 form part of the Constitution.
      An Honourable Member: What about article 15?
     Mr. Vice-President: Article 15 has been held over--Honourable Members must have been inattentive not to hear the suggestion made by Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari and accepted by the Chair. Amendment No. 537 I rule out of order as it is a negative amendment.
(Amendments Nos. 538, 539 and 540 were not moved.)
     Amendment No. 542 is already covered by the provision relating to ban on cow-killing passed by the House previously.
     Shri C. Subramaniam (Madras: General): Mr. Vice-President, Sir, I find some difficulty in accepting this article as an article coming under fundamental rights. The article reads: "Subject to the provisions of article 244 of this Constitution and of any law made by Parliament, trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free." Before referring to the difficulty, which I feel, I will refer the House to the sections in the Draft Constitution which deals with trade and commerce.
     There are three Articles 243, 244 and 245 which deal with this subject 'inter-state trade and commerce' in the body of the Draft. Then in the list of legislative powers in the Union list, we find in article 73 "inter-state trade and commerce subject to the provisions of entry 33 of List No. II". Then item 32 in List II is "trade and commerce within the state; markets and fairs"; and item 33 refers to the" regulation of trade, commerce and intercourse on other States for the purposes of the provisions of article 244 of this Constitution." Therefore, you will find inter-state trade and commerce, subject to article 244, is a Union subject. Parliament can deal with it. Trade and commerce within the state and inter-state commerce as provided in article 244 are given to the State Legislatures. You will find, Sir, that in article 244, even though it might be inter-state trade and commerce, the State Legislature is given certain powers to impose certain taxes and impose certain restrictions. Having this in mind, if we come to article 16, we find the words "subject to the provisions of article 244 of this Constitution", that is, even in respect of inter-state trade and commerce, the State Legislature has been given certain powers and that is not touched by this article. Therefore leaving that, the article would read "subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, trade and commerce and intercourse through the territory of India shall be free". I really fail to understand how this can be a fundamental right and whether there is any right at all reserved. The very conception of a fundamental right is that there is a certain right taken out of the province of the legislature either of the Union or the State. To put it in other words, the sovereignty vests in the public, but that sovereignty is delegated to the legislatures or the sovereignty is expressed through the legislatures in respect of certain subjects.
     But, in respect of certain fundamental rights we say the Parliament or the Government shall have no power of interference. So much so, the sovereignty of the people is absolute in that respect. It is neither delegated, nor is anybody else authorised to deal with that sovereignty. If we examine this article in that view, what is the residue of right left which could not be touched either by the legislature of the Union or by the legislature of the State? You find stated here, "Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free". Here, the sovereignty of the Parliament is absolute. There is no right which is taken out of the province of the legislatures. The right which is reserved here as a Fundamental right should be one, which neither the Union Legislature nor the State Legislature can touch. There is no such right left here. Mind you, here the wording in article 16 is, `Subject to any law made by Parliament' without any limitation whatsoever. So much so, it comes to this: there shall be free trade throughout the territories of India, subject to the powers of Parliament. I respectfully submit that that would not be a fundamental right.
     I know there are certain friends of mine who think that the vesting of powers in the Parliament as against the State itself is a fundamental right. That was what was expressed by certain friends. If that logic is extended to its conclusion, all the subjects dealt with in List I would be fundamental rights! That is not the case. The very conception of a fundamental right is that neither the Parliament, nor the State legislatures shall have power to interfere. Here, you make the Parliament sovereign. Only subject to the powers of Parliament, there shall be free trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territories of India. I find it difficult to see what is the right which has been taken out of the province of the legislatures, either the Parliament or the State legislatures, and which has been reserved here as a fundamental right. It may be all right to say that in respect of free trade, only the Parliament shall have power. That is allocation of administrative powers or legislative powers between the Union legislature and the State legislature. Certainly that is not a fundamental right. As one of my friends pithily put it, it is a fundamental right in favour of the Parliament; it is not a right in favour of any citizen or class of citizens. In these circumstances, I wish the honourable Mover, though I find him preoccupied with other things,--I do not know whether he has followed my speech--to explain how this comes under the Chapter on Fundamental Rights, and what is the right reserved.
     Mr. Vice-President: May I suggest, Mr. Subramaniam, that you make a definite suggestion so that Dr. Ambedkar may be in a position to reply?
     Shri C. Subramaniam: The definite suggestion is this. For the sake of Dr. Ambedkar, I shall state my point again. My complaint in regard to article 16 is this. There is no right which has been taken out of the province of the legislature, either of the Union or of the States, to say that a fundamental right has been reserved in article 16. Because, you will find it is stated here, "Subject (leaving alone reference to article 244) to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, trade and commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free". You see the right is subject to any law made by Parliament without any restrictions whatsoever. You have secured the sovereignty of the Parliament in respect of this subject, and Parliament can do anything. To be a fundamental right, it should have been taken out of the province of the legislatures, either of the Union or of the States. I find there is left no residue of any right which could not be touched either by Parliament or by the State legislature and as such, it would not properly come under the Chapter on Fundamental Rights. It may be a matter of allocation of powers between the Parliament and the State legislatures in saying that the Parliament alone shall deal with subjects relating to free trade within the territories of India. We can as well put in entry 73 of List I. You canal so make some restriction in entries 32 and 33 of List II, that it shall be subject to matters relating to free trade in India. I would request the Honourable mover, to enlighten me whether, as a matter of fact, there is any right left which has been taken out of the province of the legislatures and the Government and whether it will be proper to have article 16 here, in this chapter dealing with fundamental rights.
     The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam (Madras: General): Sir, the only way to test whether article 16 is necessary is to find out the consequences of deleting article 16. Suppose article 16 is not there, what will happen? According to the lists in the schedule, the Centre will have the right to legislate on all matters of trade between the various provinces, and according to article 243, no province can make any discrimination against any province or State. According to article 244, there can be no discrimination taxation. According to article 244 (b), every State (this includes every provincial legislature) will have the right to impose by law such reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse with that State as may be required in the public interests. Therefore, each provincial legislature and each State legislature will have the right to impose restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse. Supposing a variety of restrictions are imposed by all the legislatures and it is found desirable to rationalise them, to bring them into some kind of uniformity, there will be no power vested in any agency. Article 16 gives that power to the Parliament. It cannot interfere with the provincial jurisdiction so far as trade and commerce are concerned within that particular province.
     Shri C. Subramaniam: That authority is provided for in article 245.
     The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam: Article 245 says:"Parliament may by law appoint such authority as it considers appropriate for the carrying out of the provisions of articles 243 and 244 of this Constitution and confer on the authority so appointed such powers and such duties as it thinks necessary". This is only for the purpose of regulation; it does not provide any legislative power for any co-ordination, correlation or standardisation of all the restrictions that may be imposed by the various legislatures, and therefore, that power is contained in article 16. Mr. Subramaniam asks, then it means that the whole power is taken out of the hands of the province. I say, it is not.
     Shri C. Subramaniam: My point is this: A fundamental right is not a question of conferring power on Parliament or on the State legislature; it is taking away both from the Union Parliament and from the State legislature; that alone is a fundamental right. Fundamental rights do not deal with allocation of powers at all.
     The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam: I do not think Mr. Subramaniam is correct. A fundamental right may consist of this provision that the State legislature shall not interfere in one matter and that that matter can be interfered with only by Parliament; or a fundamental right may be that the Parliament shall not interfere with a matter and only the State legislature may do it. Distribution of powers and the consequent results on the citizens are as much matters of fundamental rights which accrue to the individual. If all the clauses on fundamental rights are scrutinised you will find that in many cases, we have made provision that in this matter, the Parliament may interfere, but the State legislature may not interfere. Therefore, I think that in the interests of freedom of trade, article 16 is absolutely essential and without article 16, the whole structure may become so complicated that almost fancy restrictions and fancy laws may be made by the provincial legislatures, and the internal trade of India may become clogged and obstructed. Therefore, I suggest that article 16 should continue.
     Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : (Madras: General): Sir, I do not find any inconsistency nor do I find article 16 unnecessary. I agree with my friend. Mr. Subramaniam that if there is nothing left and the whole sphere of inter-state commerce can be regulated either by the States concerned or by the Parliament, there is no need for Fundamental right but I do not agree that there is nothing left as he expects or as he is afraid. Some rights of freedom of speech etc. are given under article 13. Article 16 ensures freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India. That is the Fundamental Right. Exceptions are made under article 244 in favour of the States and of any law made by Parliament under the other article. So far as laws made by Parliament are concerned, Parliament can act only in so far as certain powers are conferred on it under list I. So far as the States are concerned they can come under list II. Entry No. 32 in the State List refers to trade and commerce within the States. Now so far as trade and commerce within the State is concerned, it is the exclusive jurisdiction of the States. I am only giving an instance as to why this article is necessary in the Chapter on Fundamental Rights.
     In my presidency there are two districts; one is in the north and the other is in the south, growing cotton, one is in the Andhra and the other is in the Tamil Nadu. Today the district in the south is a progressive district and it has an umber of cotton mills and is utilising all cotton and is sending out yarn and cloth to other parts of the Presidency. There is a move in the northern district which grows cotton to establish certain spinning mills. We will assume that the Madras Government tries to impose certain restrictions and says that the new spinning mill that is going to be established in Cuddappah shall not send any of its yarn to any of the districts which have been already served by the Coimbatore mills. There is absolutely no provision here which prevents this. Unless a proviso is given to that extent, there is nothing preventing any State or any particular State making discrimination between one district and another. Under article 243 we cannot make any distinction between one state and another. But within the State itself there is nothing preventing a State from exercising its right by way of discrimination. There is a possibility. Let us take Bombay Presidency. Ahmedabad has got textile mills. Bombay also has got some mills. Now it is open to the legislature to prevent, as it is, the Southern portion of the Bombay Presidency from developing its resources altogether by imposing a restriction that it shall not send any of its produce or products to any other part of the Bombay Presidency.
     Shri C. Subramaniam: May I point out it is covered by13 (g)?
     Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar: 13 (g) says:--
     "to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or business."
     You are allowed to carry on an occupation by manufacturing this but it is not as if you can carry on a business irrespective of any other consideration.
     Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (West Bengal: General): It deals with commerce and intercourse.
     Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar: It deals with commerce and trade and there is a third word `intercourse' also. I am coming to it. So far as commerce and trade is concerned I beg to submit that it is not covered by article 13(g). Let us now refer to sub-clause (6) which says--
     "(6) Nothing in sub-clause (g) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, imposing in the interests of public order, morality or health, restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause and in particular prescribing or empowering any authority to prescribe, the professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business."
     But it does not mean that you can impose any sort of restriction. It comes under clause (g). It comes under clause (6) of article 13 and therefore there is necessity for an independent clause like article 16, which gives to every man freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the length and breadth of India.
     As regards the word 'intercourse' also, apart from trade and commerce, for various purposes intercourse from one province to another is necessary. That is also not provided for in the Fundamental rights either in article 13or elsewhere.
     Shri C. Subramaniam: That is purely the province of the Parliament.
     Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar: With reference to States, what happens?
     Shri C. Subramaniam: You cannot discriminate.
     Mr. Vice-President: I am afraid there is a lot of infringment of Parliamentary procedure and of irregularity among people who have more experience than I have.
     Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar: Article 243 says--
     "No preference shall be given to one State over another nor shall any discrimination be made between one State and another by any law or regulation relating to trade or commerce, whether carried by land, water or air."
     This prevents discrimination between one State and another State. There is no article here which says that you ought not to discriminate between one part of a State and another part of the State. This is also covered by article 16; I beg to submit, Sir, that so far as discrimination between one area of the State and another is concerned there is no provision: and if not for any other reason, at least for this, this article is necessary.
     The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Mr. Vice-President, what I understood from Mr. Subramaniam, if I have understood him correctly is not that he objects to article 16, but his objection is directed to the place which this article finds. He says that although there may be utility and necessity so far as this article is concerned, it ought not to find a place in the fundamental rights. And his second point, if I have understood him correctly is that as this article is made subject to article 244, article 16 may be completely nullified, and to use his own words, no residue of it might be left if the powers given under article 244 were exercised. I think I am right in thus summarising what he said.
     Now, I quite appreciate the argument that this article 16 is out of place in the list of fundamental rights, and to some extent, I agree with Mr. Subramaniam. But I shall explain to him why it was found necessary to include this matter in the fundamental rights. My Friend, Mr. Subramaniam will remember that when the Constituent Assembly began, we began under certain limitations. One of the limitations was that the Indian States would join the Union only on three subjects--foreign affairs, defence and communications. On no other matter they would agree to permit the Union Parliament to extend its legislative and executive jurisdiction. So he will realise that the Constituent Assembly, as well as the Drafting Committee, was placed under a very serious limitation. On the one hand it was realised that there would be no use and no purpose served in forming an All-India Union if trade and commerce throughout India was not free. That was the general view. On the other hand, it was found that so far as the position of the States was concerned, to which I have already made a reference, they were not prepared to allow trade and commerce throughout India to be made subject to the legislative  authority of the Union Parliament. Or to put it briefly and in a different language, they were not prepared to allow trade and commerce to be included as an entry in List No. I. If it was possible for us to include trade and commerce in list I, which means that parliament will have the executive authority to make laws with regard to trade and commerce throughout India, we would not have found it necessary to bring trade and commerce under article 16, in the fundamental rights. But as that door was blocked, on account of the basic considerations which operated at the beginning of the Constituent Assembly, we had to find some place, for the purpose of uniformity in the matter of trade and commerce throughout India, under some head. After exercising considerable amount of ingenuity, the only method we found of giving effect to the desire of a large majority of our people that trade and commerce should be free throughout India, was to bring it under fundamental rights. That is the reason why, awkward as it may seem, we thought that there was not other way left to us, except to bring trade and commerce under fundamental rights. I think that will satisfy my friend Mr. Subramaniam why we gave this place to trade and commerce in the list of fundamental rights, although theoretically, I agree, that the subject is not germane to the subject-matter of fundamental rights.
     With regard to the other argument, that since trade and commerce have been made subject to article 244, we have practically destroyed the fundamental right, I think I may fairly say that my friend Mr. Subramaniam has either not read article 244, or has misread that article. Article 244 has a very limited scope. All that it does is to give powers to the provincial legislatures in dealing with inter-state commerce and trade, to impose certain restrictions on the entry of goods manufactured or transported form another State, provided the legislation is such that it does not impose any disparity, discrimination between the goods manufactured within the State and the goods imported from outside the State. Now, I am sure he will agree that that is a very limited law. It certainly does not take away the right of trade and commerce and intercourse throughout India which is required to be free.
     Shri C. Subramaniam: The clause says that it shall be lawful for any State to impose by law such reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse....as may be required in the public interests.
     The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes, but reasonable restrictions do not mean that the restrictions can be such as to altogether destroy the freedom and equality of trade. It does not mean that at all.
     Sir, I therefore submit that the article as it stands is perfectly in order and I commend it to the House.
     Mr. Vice-President: I shall now put the article to the vote.
     The question before us is that:--
     Article 16 stand part of the Constitution.
The motion was adopted.
     Article 16 was added to the Constitution.
Article 17
     Mr. Vice-President : Now we come to article 17.
     The motion before the House is that article 17 form part of the Constitution.
     There are a number of amendments to this article, and they will be gone through now. The first in my list is No.543. It is a negative one and is therefore ruled out.
     There is an amendment to this amendment, that is No. 93 in List V, standing in the name of Shri Ram Chandra Upadhyaya.
     (Interruption by Mr. Kamath.)
     Yes, Mr. Kamath, you are observing that there are other amendments?
     Shri H. V. Kamath (C. P. and Berar: General): Yes, Sir. No. 544.
     Mr. Vice-President: But I have not called out that. I was dealing with No. 543, and amendment No. 93 to amendment No. 543.
     Shri H. V. Kamath: But Sir, that has not been moved. How can an amendment to that amendment be moved or even called?
     Mr. Vice-President: Are you pointing out my mistake? Have I not already confessed that I am innocent of all these rules? Is it necessary to-rub it in every time, Mr. Kamath? 
     Now, we come to amendment No. 544, standing in the name of Kazi Syed Karimuddin.
     Shri H. V. Kamath: I do not in the least presume to advise you, Sir.
     Kazi Syed Karimuddin : Mr. Vice-President, Sir, I move:
     That for article 17, the following be substituted:
     "17. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude such as begar except as a punishment for crime shall exist within the Union State."
     Sir, there is not much of a change in the amendment I am moving. But article 17(1) does not cover cases in which prisoners are asked to work, a prisoner is asked to work against his own free will. If this article is allowed to remain as it is, then the jail authorities will not be allowed to take work from the prisoners. Therefore I have mentioned the words "except as a punishment for crime". I may point out that such an article finds a place in the American Constitution also.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment No. 545. Shri Damodar Swarup Seth.
     Shri Damodar Swarup Seth (United Provinces: General): Sir, I move:
     "That the following words be added at the beginning of clause (1) of article 17:--
            'Servitude and serfdom in all forms as well as'."
     I do not think this is a point on which one is required to speak at length. I will therefore, only like to submit that in some States serfdom and servitude in some form or another prevails. Moreover, in the South customs like devadas is have taken root.
     Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (West Bengal: General): What is serfdom as distinguished form servitude?.
     Mr. Vice-President: The Honourable Member wants to know from you what is the meaning of serfdom.
     Shri Damodar Swarup Seth: It is a form of servitude or I may say, `slavery' that prevails in States.
     Mr. Vice-President: Probably it is his idea with respect to this distinction between serfdom and servitude.
     The next three amendments are Nos. 546, 547 and 548, of which the most comprehensive is No. 546, standing in the name of Prof. K. T. Shah.
     Prof. K. T. Shah (Bihar. General): Sir, I move:
     "That in clause (1) of article 17, for the words Traffic in human beings and begar', the words `Traffic inhuman beings or their dedication in the name of religion to be Devadas is or be subject to other forms of enslavement and degradation and begar' be substituted."
     In commending this motion I should like to point out that by "Traffic in human beings". I understand the possibility of buying and selling as if these human beings were chattels, and as such ought to be prohibited. The common understanding interprets these words to mean slavery as it was practised in olden countries, and, until recent times, even in the so-called civilized countries of Europe or America. It is but right that such traffic should be abolished.
     But the traffic in human beings is not confined only to what was known as slavery in recent times. It happens,--and perhaps it happens on a much larger scale than innocent Members of this House may be aware--in what is known as White Slave traffic, namely, the buying and selling of young women for export or import, from one set of countries to another; and their permanent enslavement or servitude to an owner or proprietor of the establishments of Commercialised vice probably for life.
     This is covered no doubt by ordinary forms of legal contract, where the contracting parties are presumed to be free agents. How far such legal contracts are truly lawful if interpreted in the spirit of the law, I cannot say. But that these contracts offend very much against the common sense of all civilized humanity, I am prepared to assert.
     Accordingly, I would like it very clearly to be understood by this amendment that "traffic in human beings" does not consist only of buying and selling of what were formerly known as slaves: but also this new type of slavery which in effect is a very large scale commercialised vice that the so-called civilized countries have popularised, or, may I say, have made an industry of.
     This may not perhaps have been in the minds of the draftsman of this clause. But I think the House would do well to bear it in mind, and to accept this amendment by which such a practice would be perfectly clearly and expressly prohibited.
     I have, no doubt, worded my amendment with reference to a particular form of slavery which prevails in this country to a large extent, namely, dedication, in the name of religion, of young women to be Devadasis, and as such devoted to immoral traffic almost from an immature age. This also I think ought to be stopped. The name or cloak of religion should not help all those who indulge in such traffic; and the Constitution should make no bones about prohibiting this, if I am right in reading the spirit of this article which would prohibit all kinds of traffic inhuman beings.
     Forced labour is no doubt an evil; and the peculiar form of it, which is known by the word "begar", that is to say of compulsory work without payment, and work at command, should also be stopped. But more than anything else. I would like by this amendment to emphasize this highly immoral, and; I was going to say, inhuman traffic, which prevail on a very large scale, much larger than perhaps the House realizes, and as such I commend this amendment to the House.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment No. 547.
     Shri B. Das (Orissa: General): Sir, I do not move but I wish to speak.
     Mr. Vice-President: I cannot allow you to speak. Do you want that it should be put to the vote?
     Shri B. Das: No Sir, I do not move. Could you not allow me to say a word?
     Mr. Vice-President: I cannot because that will create a general flutter in the House. You will have to take your chance.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment No. 548.
Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir (East Punjab: Sikh): Sir, my amendment reads:
     "That in clause (1) of article 17, after the words, human beings' the words `including prostitution' be inserted."
     Mr. Vice-President: Do you want to move it?
     Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir: *[I merely want to say something.
     Mr. Vice-President: I cannot say that every Member who has sent in an amendment would find time to speak. I must make this clear, because we have to hurry.
(Amendments 549, 550 and 552 were not moved.)
     Amendment No. 551: This is a verbal amendment and therefore it is disallowed.
(Amendment 553 was not moved.)
     Amendment No. 554: This is a verbal amendment and therefore it is disallowed.
     Amendments Nos. 555, 558 and 560 are to be considered together, I can allow No. 555 to be moved.
     Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor (United Provinces: General): I am not moving amendment No. 555.
     Sardar Bhopinder Singh Man (East Punjab: General): Mr. Vice-President, Sir, I beg to move--
     "That in clause (2) of article 17, after the words" caste or class" the words "and shall pay adequate compensation for it" be inserted."
     Sir, with the addition of my amendment clause (2) will read thus:
     "Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from imposing compulsory service for public purposes and shall pay adequate compensation for it."
     Begar is a sort of forced work from labourers and we have sought to abolish it and prohibit it in the country. The idea is that the worker should not be made to work against his will, but however an exception is made that the State can impose compulsory service for public purposes. Now, supposing the State requires any property and deprives any citizen of it, there is the accepted principle that it shall pay compensation, adequate price, for it. Similarly, when the State deprives a worker of his lab our, (and I believe his labour is his property for the labourer) then I want that the State should pay compensation for it.
     Shri H. V. Kamath : Mr. Vice-President, Sir, I beg to move--
     "That in clause (2) of article 17, for the word" public" the words "social or national be substituted."
     At the outset, may I just say that the non-English word in this article--begar--has nowhere been defined and it will be better if we define it somewhere in the constitution, if not in this article itself. Now, coming to the amendment, to my mind the word "public" does not bring out the meaning or significance of the purport of clause (2) of this article as much as the word "social" or "national" will. We all know that the services of the State--Government services--are referred to as "public services", but "national service" or "social service" has got a wider and a higher, a more comprehensive connotation than the word "public service". I remember very well that during the proceedings of the National Planning Committee, which was brought into being by Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose and presided over by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and to which my friend Prof. K. T. Shah rendered yeoman service for a period of well over three or four years, in that report it was suggested that all citizens should be conscripted for some social service; and Pandit Nehru when speaking on this subject went to the length of saying that no student should be awarded his academic degree unless and until he puts in six months or a year of some kind of social service. The word used there was "social service", not "public service". The word "national" has got even a still higher connotation than the word "social". My friend Dr. Ambedkar yesterday referred to this type of national service. When there is a war; when there is an emergency; when the stability of the State is threatened; when there is an emergency; when the stability of the State is threatened; when there is an insurrection; then in particular the question of national service will arise and then also will arise, as he referred to yesterday, the duty of the citizens to bear arms. In these cases, I say there must be conscription, I do not mean for military service only but for some kind of service in the national cause. Even conscientious objectors must be asked to do some kind of service, though not necessarily to bear arms and go to the front line.
     Here, I would also suggest that not merely there should be no discrimination of religion, race, caste or class, but there should be no discrimination of sex either. In this connection, however I would like to sound a note of caution and that is, against the unqualified enforcement of the duty to bear arms. The duty to bear arms, to my mind, without the corresponding right to bear arms, is one of the characteristics of a totalitarian State, a police raj or a military dictatorship, and not of a democratic State which the Preamble says our future India is going to be. The enforcement of the duty to bear arms is only the outward expression of the idea or doctrine of "dying" for the State. We must die for the State. The expression of this doctrine is the duty to bear arms. But every citizen has a higher duty to perform, and that is to "live" for the State--live for the State, and not merely die for the State--and this doctrine of "live for the State" is connected with the right to bear arms.
     In the end I suggest that clause (2) of this article may be re-worded, and for the word "public service" the words "social or national" should be substituted. I would have had no objection if they had said just "public service", but "service for public purposes" is hardly appropriate, and to my mind the significance and meaning of this clause would be better expressed if we say that "nothing in this article shall prevent the State from imposing compulsory service for social or national purposes". Sir, I move.
(Amendment No. 557 was not moved.)
     Prof. K. T. Shah : Mr. Vice-President, Sir, I beg to move--
     "That in clause (2) of article 17, after the words "discrimination on the ground" the word "only" be added."
     This, Sir, is a very small, but in my opinion, a very important amendment. If it is accepted the clause would read:
     ".....in imposing such service the State shall not make discrimination on the ground only of race, religion caste or class."
     The significance of this is so clear that, even though I have moved it, I trust the Draftsmen will accept it.
     Mr. Vice-President: The clause is now open for general discussion. Giani Gurmukh Singh will now speak. I give him five minutes.
     Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir : *[Mr. Vice-President, article 17 is a useful provision in the Constitution, but there are one or two short-comings which should be removed. In this connection I had given notice of an amendment but I could not get an opportunity to speak on it. I would like to say that prostitution is not in accord with the Indian civilization.
     It was imported from the West and with the departure of Western rulers it must come to an end. In clause (1) of article 17, after the words "Traffic in human beings" the word "Prostitution" must be included, for then alone the dignity of this clause will be increased, and defect removed. Another suggestion has been moved by Sardar Bhopendra Singh Man. It is a very good suggestion that, if the Government imposes compulsory service in the public interest, then the workers must get adequate compensation. It is good to specify in clause (2) of this article that in imposing compulsory service no discrimination on the ground of race, religion, caste or class shall be made. The right of imposing compulsory service conceded to the Government by this clause, is more or less absolutely vested in them. Even now, the government officials through their influence impose compulsory service. If provision is made to pay compensation, then this defect will disappear and the usefulness of this clause will be enhanced. Hitherto the practice of `Begar' was a source of oppression to the poor. Now this clause would not fit in, if it is passed without providing for payment of compensation. I do not propose to say more, as the Vice-President has already ruled; and therefore, without taking much of the, time of the House, I shall mention only two points, firstly that the curse of prostitution should go from this country and secondly, compensation must be paid for compulsory service.]*
     Shrimati G. Durgabai (Madras: General): Mr. Vice-President, let me assure you that I will take up only one or two minutes of the valuable time of the Assembly. I want to say a few words on this article. There is the amendment of Professor Shah intended to substitute in clause (1) `Traffic in human beings or their dedication in the name of religion to be Devadasis or be subject to other forms of enslavement and degradation as well as begar', for the words `Traffic in human beings and begar.'
     Sir, if any province has suffered from this bad practice of dedication of devadas is in the name of religion, it is the province of Madras. The worst form of this custom existed in Madras for a long time. I do not know whether this custom of dedication exists in any other province in any form. But we all know that in several ways this was practised. But, I do not think, while appreciating the object of Professor Shah in bringing forward this amendment and while being thankful to him for having realised the necessity for removing this evil, that this amendment is necessary. Madras has already prohibited this practice under a law passed a few years ago. It is no more in vogue there. Though some relics of that system still exist, these, I am sure, will disappear in course of time. I should mention in this connection my appreciation of the efforts put in by reformers like Mrs. Muthulakshmi Reddi. It is mainly on account of her efforts that this evil is no more there. Our deep debt of gratitude is due to her for her efforts. As I said, Madras has passed a law prohibiting this custom. I do not therefore think it necessary to include this provision in article 13, although I very much appreciate the spirit which has actuated Professor Shah to move this amendment.
     Mr. Vice-President: I now call upon Shri B. Das to speak. He is almost the father of the House and must set an example of brevity.
     Shri B. Das : Sir, on the previous occasion when we were discussing the Fundamental Principles I pointed out the need for including in the Draft Constitution the removal of this great social evil, the traffic in women. This traffic means use of force to compel women to life of prostitution. When we talk of traffic in women--which is a great social evil all over the world--I did dilate upon it last time and said that we should not be prudes and attempt to hide the fact that there existed this traffic in women in India. Sir, I bow to the decision elsewhere that I should not move my amendment which sought to add the words 'particularly in women' after the words `Traffic in human beings'.
     Sir, let us confess and admit that there is this traffic in women for which men every where are responsible. Women were often removed from Orissa. I pointed out that in the great Bengal disaster in 1943-44, lakhs of women were spirited away to the Punjab and North-West Frontier Province. Sir, young women were taken away by the alien Government into the camps of soldiers and they were thus lost to humanity, lost to family, lost to us as good citizens. So, we mere men should not fight shy of this and feel that by including an amendment of this kind we will be confessing the existence of this traffic in women in this country. That is why I gave notice of the amendment. If the House is willing to accept Shrimati Durgabai's amendment or even the amendment of Professor Shah who has confined his amendment to the Devadasi system and has not thought of the influence of dances before temples which preserve our national art and music from time immemorial.
     Shri H. V. Kamath: Has Shrimati Durgabai given notice of any amendment to this article, Sir?
     Mr. Vice-President: She has not.
     Shri B. Das: She has sent in one to Dr. Ambedkar.
     Mr. Vice-President: I have no knowledge of it.
     Shri B. Das: I am sorry, I misunderstood. However, I think we will not be justifying our constitution on fundamental rights if we do not accept and admit our great sins by including the words "traffic in women" and try to save the situation now and hereafter.
     Shri Raj Bahadur (United State of Matsya): Mr. vice-President, Sir, begar like slavery has a dark and dismal history behind it. As a man coming from an Indian State, I know what this begar, this extortion of forced lab our, has meant to the down-trodden and dumb people of the Indian States. If the whole story of this begar is written, it will be replete, with human misery, human suffering, blood and tears. I know how some of the Princes have indulged in their pomp and luxury, in their reckless life, at the expense of the ordinary man, how they have used the down-trodden labourers and dumb ignorant people for the sake of their pleasure. I know for instance how for duck shooting a very large number of people are roped in forcibly to stand all day long in mud and slush during cold chilly wintry days. I know how for the sake of their game and people have been roped in large numbers for beating the lion so that the Princes may shoot it. I have also seen how poor people are employed for domestic and other kinds of labour, no matter whether they are ailing or some members of their family are ill. These people are paid nothing or paid very little for the labour extorted from them. This is not the whole story. As I said in the beginning, it would make really a terrible reading if the whole story is told. I know that very often these tyrannies are perpetrated upon poor people by the petty officials. Not only do these petty officials perpetrate such tyrannies but they also extort bribes from the labourers who want to escape the curse of this begar. While making my observations on this article, I would like to say that I am opposed to the amendment which has been moved by Sardar Bhopindra Singh Man providing for compensation in case of compulsory labour on works for public purposes, because I feel that there is a possibility that, if this amendment is accepted, it may be misused and people might be forced against their will.
     Summing up, I may add that article 13 constitutes the charter of freedom for the common man, and this article is a sort of complement to that charter of freedom. This frees the poor, down-trodden and dumb people of the Indian. States--I cannot say anything of other provinces--from this curse of begar. This begar has been a blot on humanity and has been a denial of all that has been good and noble in human civilisation. Through the centuries this curse has remained as a dead weight on the shoulders of the common manlike the practice of slavery. The members of the Drafting Committee and this Constituent Assembly are entitled to the grateful thanks of the dumb down -trodden millions who would be freed by this article from this curse of begar.
     Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal: General): Mr. Vice-President, Sir, I shall try to be as brief as possible.
     The awakened conscience of women in India and the world is fully alive to the problem of the traffic in women and cannot tolerate its continuance. Sir, if we do not accept the amendment of Mr. B. Das, it is not because we do not appreciate his purpose. We realise that he wishes to place particular emphasis on the problem of the traffic in women, but I do think that the article as it stands does cover it. I am merely pointing this out because it may be thought that the women members of this House are not alive to this problem. It is one of the most urgent of all problems on which women's organisations in this country, have of cussed their attention for some time past.
     As for the amendment that my honourable Friend, Mr. K. T. Shah, moved, I agree with Shrimati Durgabai that legislation has covered this problem in regard to Madras, but I think that if Mr. Shah's amendment could be accepted by this House so that the Devadasi system--the dedication of women in temples--is abolished by a categorical provision in the Constitution, it would be better procedure as the custom still lingers in some areas. Otherwise it is to be hoped that legislation abolishing the custom in other parts where it still exists will soon come in. I want to stress the fact that women are fully alive to the fact that it is the dual standards of morality that have led to traffic in women. It is when society realises fully the need for doing away with dual standards of morality that this article that is being adopted can really come into effect and become a reality and not merely a paper provision in the Constitution.
     Acts for the prevention of immoral traffic in women do exist already in this country but their operation is not effective and even if legal flaws are amended, these can only become really effective when men's minds change towards this problem, whereby a section of women are at the mercy of exploiters whereby the very dignity of womenhood is lowered.
     Mr. Vice-President: Mr. Nagappa, please show that you deserve the confidence that the House has placed in you by limiting yourself to five minutes.
     Shri S. Nagappa (Madras: General): I will not take much time, Sir.
     This practice of begar is prevalent in my own part of the country, especially among the Harijans. I am glad that the Drafting Committee has inserted this clause to abolish begar. Sir, whenever cattle die; the owner of the cattle wants these poor Harijans to come and remove the dead cattle, remove the skins, tan them and make chappals and supply them free of cost. For this, what do they get? Some food during festival days. Often, Sir, this forced labour is practised even by the government. For instance, if there is any murder, after the postmortem, the police force these people to remove the dead body and look to the other funeral processes. I am glad that hereafter this sort of forced labour will have no place. Then, Sir, this is practised in zamindaries also. For instance, if there is a marriage in the zamindar's family, he will ask these poor people, especially the Harijans, to come and white wash his whole house, for which they will be given nothing except food for the day. This sort of forced labour is still prevalent in most ports of the presidency.
     Another thing that I want to bring to the notice of the course is that whenever the big zamindar's lands are to be ploughed, immediately he will send word for these poor people, the Harijans, the previous day, and say: "All your services are confiscated for the whole of tomorrow; you will have to work throughout the day and night. No one should go to any other work." In return, the zamindar will give one morsel of food to these poor fellows. Sir, this sort of forced labour is in practice in the 20th century in our so called civilised country. I am very thankful to this Drafting Committee. I support this article.
     Shri T. T. Krishnamachari (Madras: General): Mr. Vice-President, Sir, I am here primarily to oppose the amendment moved by my honourable Friend, Prof. K. T. Shah, in that it imports into the consideration of this article facts which ought not to be taken into account in a consideration of the fundamental rights that are to be incorporated in the Constitution.
     Sir, if the House would permit me a moment to deal with the general principles which are the basis of this particular Part, it is that we want to ensure certain amount of rights to the individual, so that he will be ennobled. We also want to bar legislation from creeping in into those rights, which it is absolutely necessary should be maintained intact so that the individual's status might be protected. There is no point in our trying to import into this particular Part reform of all the abuses, which our society is now heir to. If those abuses are such where vested interests are likely to seek perpetuation of those abuses, well, I think we have to provide against them, but if public opinion is sufficiently mobilised against those abuses, I do not think we ought to put a blot on the fair name of India, possibly, by enacting in our constitution a ban on such abuses. Abuses which will disappear in course of time cannot disappear all at once by our putting a ban on them in the constitution. Looking as I do at such matters in that light, I wish most a my honourable Friends in this House will not try to import into these fundamental rights age-old peculiarities of ours that still persist, bad as they are in particular parts of society which can be made to disappear by suitable legislation in due course, perhaps in two, three or four years. My honourable Friend Shrimati Durgabai pointed out that this system of Devadasis obtaining in India has been abolished by legislation in Madras. There is nothing to bar other provinces from following suit and I think public opinion is sufficiently mobilised for all provinces undertaking legislation of that type. Why then put it into the fundamental rights, a thing which is vanishing tomorrow? I think the same principle might be adopted in the rest of the article that would come before the House in this particular part, namely, what we could achieve in the matter of social reform by normal legislation, we need not seek to put into the fundamental rights, but if it is a matter where the vested interests for purposes of economic gain want to perpetuate a particular anti-social custom that obtains amongst us, well, I think, it is perfectly right that we should put it into the Fundamental Rights. I think some form of forced labour does exist in practically all parts of India, call it `begar' or anything like that and in my part of the country, the tenant often times is more or less a helot attached to the land and he has certain rights and those are contingent on his continuing to be a slave.
     We are trying to root it out, and by putting it in the fundamental rights it will hasten legislation to wipe out evils of that kind as it will then become an obligation of the State. I would only mention to the House that let us not seek to enlarge the scope of these articles by putting in evils which can be wiped out by legislation, on which public opinion is sufficiently mobilised, but only import into it such considerations against which vested interests might conceivably take a firm stand. Sir, I support the article that is being considered by the House.
     Shri Mahavir Tyagi: May I seek your permission, Mr. Vice-President. I want to clear some doubts which arise in my mind in regard to this article.
     Mr. Vice-President: I am sorry, it is too late.
     Shri Mahavir Tyagi: I must be told as to how I can catch your eye or draw your attention.
     Honourable Members: Order, order.
     Mr. Vice-President: The House has pronounced its decision.
     Shri Mahavir Tyagi: Can any one, by handing over slips or by standing every time, catch your eye, Sir?
     Mr. Vice-President: The House has pronounced its decision.
     Shri Mahavir Tyagi: What is the decision?
     Mr. Vice-President: You ask the House.
     Shri Mahavir Tyagi: I feel it is very unfair.
     The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Mr. Vice-President, I should like to state at the outset what amendments I am prepared to accept and what, I am afraid, I cannot accept. Of the amendments that have been moved, the only amendment which I am prepared to accept is the amendment by Prof. K. T. Shah, No. 559, which introduces the word "only" in clause (2) of article 17 after the words "discrimination on the ground". The rest of the amendments, I am afraid, I cannot accept. With regard to the amendments which, as I said, I cannot accept one is by Prof. K. T. Shah introducing the word 'devadasis'! Now I understand that his arguments for including `devadasis' have been replied to by other members of the House who have taken part in this debate, and I do not think that any useful purpose will be served by my adding anything to the arguments that have already been urged.
     With regard to the amendment of my honourable Friend, Mr. H. V. Kamath, he wants the words `social and national' in place of the word `public'. I should have thought that the word `public' was wide enough to cover both `national' as well as `social' and it is, therefore, unnecessary to use two words when the purpose can be served by one, and I think, he will agree that is the correct attitude to take.
     With regard to the amendment of my honourable Friend Shri Damodar Swarup Seth, it seems to be unnecessary and I, therefore, do not accept it. With regard to the amendment of Sardar Bhopinder Singh Man, he wants that wherever compulsory labour is imposed by the State under the provisions of clause (2) of article 17 a proviso should be put in that such compulsory service shall always be paid for by the State. Now, I do not think that it is desirable to put any such limitation upon the authority of the State requiring compulsory service. It may be perfectly possible that the compulsory service demanded by the State may be restricted to such hours that it may not debar the citizen who is subjected to the operation of this clause to find sufficient time to earn his livelihood, and if, for instance, such compulsory labour is restricted to what might be called `hours of leisure' or the hours, when, for instance, he is not otherwise occupied in earning his living, it would be perfectly justifiable for the State to say that it shall not pay any compensation.
     In this clause, it may be seen that non-payment of compensation could not be a ground of attack; because the fundamental proposition enunciated in sub-clause (2) is this: that whenever compulsory labour or compulsory service is demanded, it shall be demanded from all and if the State demands service from all and does not pay any, I do not think the State is committing any very great inequity. I feel, Sir, it is very desirable to leave the situation as fluid as it has been left in the article as it stands.
     Shri H. V. Kamath: On a point of information, Sir, is Dr. Ambedkar's objection to my amendment merely on the ground that it consists of two words in place of one? In that case, I shall be happy if the wording is either 'social' or `national' in place of `public'.
     The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: It is better to use a wider phraseology which includes both.
     Shri Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri: (Assam: General): May I know, Sir, does the honourable Member accept amendment No.548, which deals with prostitution, and which was moved by Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir?
     The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I understand it was not moved.
     Mr. Vice-President : It was not moved.
     I shall now put the amendments to vote one by one.
     Amendment No. 544 standing in the name of Kazi Syed Karimuddin.
     The question is:
     "That for article 17, the following be substituted:--
     "17. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude such as begar except as a punishment for crime shall exist within the Union State."
     The amendment was negatived.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment No. 545 standing in the name of Shri Damodar Swarup Seth.
     The question is:
     "That the following words be added at the beginning of clause (1) of article 17."
     "Servitude and serfdom in all forms as well as."
The amendment was negatived.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment No. 546 standing in the name of Professor K. T. Shah.
     The question is:
     "That in clause (1) of article 17, for the words" Traffic in human beings and begar", the words "Traffic inhuman beings or their dedication in the name of religion to be Devadasis or be subject to other forms of enslavement and degradation as well as begar" be substituted."
     The amendment was adopted.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment No. 560 standing in the name of Sardar Bhopinder Singh Man.
     The question is:
     "That in clause (2) of article 17, after the words "caste or class" the words "and shall pay adequate compensation for it" be inserted."
     Sardar Bhopinder Singh Man: Sir, I request the permission of the House to withdraw it.
     The amendment was, by leave of the Assembly, withdrawn.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment No. 556 standing in the name of Mr. Kamath.
     The question is:
     "That in clause (2) of article 17, for the word" public" the words "social or national" be substituted."
The amendment was negatived.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment No. 559 standing in the name of Professor K. T. Shah, accepted by Dr. Ambedkar.
     The question is:
     "That in clause (2) of article 17, after the words "discrimination on the ground" the word "only" be added."
The amendment was adopted.
     Mr. Vice-President: I shall now put the article as a whole as modified by amendment No. 559 to vote.
     The question is:
     That article 17 as modified by amendment No. 559 form part of the Constitution.
The motion was adopted.
     Article 17, as amended, was added to the Constitution.
Article 18
     Mr. Vice-President : We now go to the next article.
     The motion is that Article 18 form part of the Constitution.
     The first amendment is No. 561. This is negative and therefore, it is out of order.
     Amendments numbers 562 and 564: No. 562 standing in the name of Professor Shibban Lal Saksena and 564 standing in the name of Shri Damodar Swarup Seth and others are of similar import and have therefore to be considered together. Amendment No. 562 is allowed to be moved.
    Prof. Shibban Lal Saksena (United Provinces: General): Sir, I am not moving the amendment; but I would like to speak on the article.
     Mr. Vice-President: Then, I will allow amendment No.564 to be moved.
     Shri Damodar Swarup Seth : Sir, I beg to move:
     "That the following be added at the end of article 18:
      'Nor shall women be employed at night, in mines or in industries detrimental to their health.'"
     Sir, it is a matter of great satisfaction that in article 18 protection has been afforded to children of minor age. But, unfortunately, for reasons not known to me, no protection has been provided for the fairer and softer sex, who had been in the past, employed in mines even at night time and in industries which are injurious to their health. I therefore think, Sir, that it is just and desirable that the addition suggested should be made in this article so that women may also be provided with due protection and may not be employed in mines at night and in industries which are not suited to their delicate health and position in society. I therefore hope that the House will accept this amendment of mine.
      Mr. Vice-President: Then, comes amendment No. 563.
     (Amendments 563 and 565 were not moved.)
     The article is open for general discussion.
     Prof. Shibban Lal Saksena : Sir, I am very glad that this article has been placed among fundamental rights. In fact, one of the complaints against this charter of liberty is that it does not provide for sufficient economic rights. If we examine the fundamental rights in the Constitutions of other countries, we will find that many of them are concerned with economic rights. In Russia particularly, the right to work is guaranteed; the right to rest and leisure, the right to maintenance in old age and sickness etc., are guaranteed. We have provided these things in our Directive Principles, although I think, properly, they should be in this Chapter. Even then, this article 18 is an economic right, that no child below the age of fourteen shall be employed in any factory. I feel, Sir, that the age should be raised to sixteen. In other countries also the age is higher; we want that in our country also this age should be increased; particularly on account of our climate, children are weak at this age and the age should be raised.
     So also, I want that women should not be employed in the night or after dusk and before dawn in the factories. In fact all the progressive countries in the world have forbidden female labour after dusk and before dawn. This question was debated at length during the discussion on the Factory Act in the Parliament. I think that this is a question of very fundamental importance and this should be laid down in the Fundamental Rights that the States shall not employ women after dusk or before dawn. Sir, if this important thing had been done, we would have been hailed by innumerable women workers in the country--especially as it is a question of employing women in mines and factories. You know there was a great furore in the country during the war when women were allowed to work in mines, and I personally think that this must be considered as something very important and I hope Dr. Ambedkar will see his way to include it.
     The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not accept the amendment moved by Mr. Damodar Swarup--No. 564.
     Mr. Vice-President: I put the amendment No. 564 to vote.
     The question is:
     "That the following be added at the end of article 18:--
     'Nor shall women be employed at night, in mines or in industries detrimental to health.'"
The amendment was negatived.
     Mr. Vice-President: Now I put the motion--
     The question is:
     "That article 18 stand part of the Constitution."
The motion was adopted.
Article 18 was added to the Constitution.
Article 18-A
     Mr. Vice-President : Now we come to a new article in the form of amendment No. 566.
     Prof. K. T. Shah : Mr. Vice-President, I beg to move.
     "That the following new article be inserted under the heading "Rights relating to Religion" occurring after article 18:--
'18-A. The State in India being secular shall have no concern with any religion, creed or profession of faith; and shall observe an attitude of absolute neutrality in all matters relating to the religion of any class of its citizens or other persons in the Union.'"
     This, Sir, ought not to be a controversial matter at all. We have proclaimed it time and again that the State in India is secular; and as such it should have no concern--I should think that would follow logically--with the affairs of any religion, with the profession of any particular faith, creed or belief.
     By this I do not wish to suggest that the neutrality of the State in matters of religion should mean the utter ignorance or neglect of institutions or services which may, in the name of religion or belief, be conducted by people professing a particular form of faith. All I wish to say is that with the actual profession of faith or belief, the State should have no concern. Nor should it, by any action of it, give any indication that it is partial to one or the other. All classes of citizens should have the same treatment in matters mundane from the State. And even those who may not be citizens of this State, by living within it, should receive the same treatment.
     The citizens of this Union obviously belong to all professions, a wide variety of faiths or religious beliefs. To take one or the other, or even to suggest that one or the other is favoured or assisted or aided by the State in its mundane affairs at any time--if I may put it so,--would not be in the interest of the State. For it would give any other section of the people professing another belief, the impression that any particular section is preferred.
     If the State can--and I believe it can very easily--promote all mundane services, all worldly activities and utilities which are for the benefit of the community collectively--no matter by what section they are carried on--then, according to my amendment, there ought to be no objection. But if the State is associated in any way with the promotion of any particular form of profession or faith, then I think it would be highly objectionable for a secular organization to do so.
     Accordingly I am suggesting that "The State in India being secular shall have no concern with any religion, creed or profession of faith". I am again and again emphasising this aspect of religion because that is by its very essence, a non-worldly activity, and as such the State which is--may I say it without any disrespect--essentially an earthly organization, should have no concern.
     One could dilate upon this matter for an indefinite period. I do not regard occasions of this kind, or debates of this nature to be opportunities for unconscious self-revelation or deliberate professions of one's own attitude. I therefore will not take the time of the House in going further into this subject which I am sure would interest everybody sufficiently, at any rate, to consider favourably my amendment.
(Amendment No. 567 was not moved.)
     Mr. Vice-President: No. 568.
     Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: May I point out that this amendment relates to a matter more or less akin to 13-A which you were good enough to keep in abeyance for the time being?
     Mr. Vice-President: Then it may stand over.
(Amendment No. 569 was not moved.)
     Mr. Vice-President: I put amendment No. 566 to vote.
     The question is:--
     "That the following new article be inserted under the heading "Rights relating to Religion" occurring after article 18:
'18-A. The State in India being secular shall have no concern with any religion, creed or profession of faith; and shall observe an attitude of absolute neutrality in all matters relating to the religion of any class of its citizens or other persons in the Union.'"
The amendment was negatived.

Article 14-(Contd.)
     Mr. Vice-President : We shall go back to Article 14. So far as I remember --I am sorry I have mislaid my notes--in article 14 there were a number of amendments which were put to the vote one after the other, and that only two amendments were being considered, when, for reasons already known to the House, we postponed their consideration. One was amendment No. 512 moved by Kazi Syed Karimuddin, and the other was a suggestion--am I right in saying that it was a suggestion made by Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari? Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari, will you please enlighten me? Was it a suggestion or was it a short notice amendment?
     Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: It was a short notice amendment.
     Mr. Vice-President: It was a short notice amendment admitted by me. These two only remained to be put to the vote.
     Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : With regard to amendment No. 512I have a point of order, Mr. Vice-President.
     You will be pleased to remember, Sir, that amendment No. 512 was moved in the House. It was accepted by Dr. Ambedkar and then it was put to the vote. The shouts according to your estimate were in favour of its acceptance. Then some trouble arose and then shouts were again called. The shouts according to your estimate were again in favour of the amendment. What is very important in this connection, Sir, is that you declared the amendment to be carried.
     Mr. Vice-President: Did I declare the amendment to be carried?
     Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: Yes, Sir. I remember.
     Mr. Vice-President: Do the records show that?
     Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: The shorthand notes may be referred to. My recollection is it was declared carried (Interruption).
     Mr. Vice-President: Kindly, in order to preserve the diginity of the House, do not interrupt Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad only because he is putting forward a point of view which may not be agreeable to a certain section of the House.
     (To Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed) Kindly confine your remarks to the business on hand.
     Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: Sir, I do not wish to obstruct the majority in dealing with this amendment in any way they please. I simply suggest that if it is carried, it cannot be put again. It is against the Rules. But I have a way out, which I shall suggest and which will be constitutional. There is a rule, in our Rules, that with the consent of twenty five per cent of the Members of the House, any resolution that has been carried may be re-opened. I suggest, Sir, that if I am right that it was declared to be carried, then, it should be re-opened in the regular constitutional manner.
     Mr. Vice-President: The official records of the deliberations read this way.
     "Just before the voting was called, however, Shri Mahavir Tyagi made a suggestion, which was later supported by the Prime Minister, that the voting on this particular amendment be postponed as there appeared to be some confusion as to the full implications of this provision. The House agreed to the suggestion and voting on this amendment and on the article as a whole was accordingly postponed."
     That shows that your whole objection falls to the ground.
     (Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad rose to speak.)
     Please do not argue.
     I want to make certain other things clear to the House. I want to make clear the point of view from which I regard this. As I have said already, the House is the ultimate authority in this as in all matters. The House has laid down certain Rules for the conduct of the business. These Rules have been laid down mainly because the aim of the House is that the work should proceed smoothly. The smooth working of the House I regard as the really essential thing, and much more important than sticking to the Rules which the House has made and which the House can un-make at any time. When there was this confusion, to use the language of Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad, I made a reference to the House and the House agreed that the matter should be reconsidered. The House is fully competent to do so and if the House is still of that view, then the matter will be considered here and now.
     Maulana Hasrat Mohani: (United Provinces: Muslim): May I know, Sir, whether the House has reconsidered or whether it is a mandate from the Congress Party who has issued a whip that it should be opposed? Do you decide to allow the House to reconsider or is it only a mandate from the Congress Party? I have got a copy of that whip in my hand, that this must be opposed.
     Shri Mahavir Tyagi: (United Provinces: General): Sir, I protest against the language used and the honourable Member's referring to the whip of the Congress Party.
     Mr. Vice-President: You have done your duty as a Congress man; now I shall do my duty as the presiding officer here.
     Maulana Hasrat Mohani: Sir, I stick to what I have said.
     Mr. Vice-President: I am sorry.....................
     Shri Mahavir Tyagi: Will you please ask him to give back the whip, which the honourable Member has no right to handle?
     Mr. Vice-President: You are always the stormy petrel. While I am trying to bring peace and good humour you are interfering. I will not allow you to do so again.
     As I was saying, I am very sorry that an old and experienced public man like Maulana Hasrat Mohani should have permitted himself to make references to things which are no concern of this House. As I have said more than once, though I belong to a particular political party, so long as I am in the Chair, I recognise no party at all. It is in that spirit that proceedings of this House are being conducted. I regret very much that anything should have been said challenging the way in which the proceedings have been conducted or are going to be conducted.
     I ask the permission of the House once again as to whether I can re-open the matter.
     Honourable Members: Yes.
     Mr. Vice-President: Thank you. I am going to put amendment No. 512 to the vote.
     The Honourable Shri Ghanshyam Singh Gupta : Sir, there is no question of re-opening. You had not finally said that the amendment was carried or was not carried. I want to impress upon the House that the Chair had not declared that it was either carried or it was not carried and therefore there is no question of re-opening at all. The matter is absolutely in the discretion of the Chair now. The Rules are quite clear. A vote is taken. Once it is challenged. the division bell rings. After the division bell rings, the Chair again puts it to the vote and then sends Ayes and Noes to the lobbies. The Teller counts the votes and after that, it is declared that a certain motion is lost or is carried. This was not done at all. In fact, it was in the process of declaration by the Chair that the motion is or is not carried that the Chair was pleased to say that this thing stands over. Anybody who says that the Chair finally declared that that motion was carried or lost is wrong.
     Mr. Vice-President: It merely shows the depth of my ignorance. I used the word which should not have been used. I used the word `reopen'. I am glad that the matter has been set right. I only wish that I had sufficient--what shall I say--ability to act in the way in which the Honourable Mr. Gupta has done. I now put amendment No. 512 to vote.
     The question is:
     "That in article 14, the following be added as clause(4):--
     "(4) The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated and no warrants shall issue but upon probable cause supported by oath or affirmation and particularly describing the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized."
The amendment was negatived.
     Mr. Vice-President: We come to Mr. Krishnamachari's amendment which was accepted by Dr. Ambedkar.
     Shri H. V. Kamath: Is it necessary to say that Dr. Ambedkar has accepted or rejected every time?
     Mr. Vice-President: Sometimes it is necessary. Not always. I now put the amendment to vote.
     The question is:
     "That in clause 2 of article 14 after the word `shall be' the words `prosecuted and 'be inserted."
The amendment was adopted.
     Mr. Vice-President: Now the question is:
     "That article 14, as amended, stand part of the Constitution."
The motion was adopted.
     Article 14, as amended was added to the Constitution.
Article 15
     Mr. Vice-President : Now the motion before the House is: that article 15 form part of the Constitution.
     We shall go over the amendments one after another. 515 is ruled out of order. Nos. 516, 517, 518 and 532 are similar and of these I can allow 516 to be moved as also 517 both standing in the name of Shri Brajeshwar Prasad.
     Shri Brajeshwar Prasad: (Bihar: General): Sir, I am not moving 516 and 517.
(Amendments Nos. 518, 532, 519 and 520 were not moved.)
     Mr. Vice-President: No. 521 is blocked. Then 522, 523,524, 525, 528 and 530 are similar. I can allow 523 to be moved.
     Kazi Syed Karimuddin (C. P. & Berar: Muslim): Mr. Vice-President, Sir, if the proposed amendment by the Drafting Committee is accepted and the article is allowed to stand as it is:-
     "No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law........".
     then in my opinion, it will open a sad chapter in the history of constitutional law. Sir, the Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights appointed by the Constituent Assembly had suggested that no person shall be deprived of his life or liberty without due process of law; and I really do not understand how the words "personal" and "according to procedure established by law" have been brought into article 15 by the Drafting Committee.
     Shri Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: Sir, is the honourable Member moving his amendment or not?
     Mr. Vice-President: In order to meet the requirements of technicalities, please move your amendment first.
     Kazi Syed Karimuddin: Sir, I beg to move-
     "That in article 15, for the words "No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law" the words "No person shall be deprived of his life or liberty without due process of law" be substituted.
     Continuing my arguments Sir, if the words "according to procedure established by law" are enacted, there will be very great injustice to the law courts in the country, because as soon as a procedure according to law is complied with by a court, there will be an end to the duties of the court and if the court is satisfied that the procedure has been complied with, then the judges cannot interfere with any law which might have been capricious, unjust or iniquitous. The clause, as it stands, can do great mischief in a country which is the storm centre of political parties and where discipline is unknown. Sir, let us guarantee to individuals inalienable rights in such a way that the political parties that come into power cannot extend their jurisdiction in curtailing and invading the Fundamental rights laid down in this Constitution.
     Sir, there is an instance in the American Constitutional law in a case reported, Chambers Vs. Florida where an act was challenged in a court of law on the ground that the law was not sound and that it was capricious and unjust. Therefore, my submission is that if the words "according to procedure established by law" are kept then it will not be open to the courts to look into the injustice of a law or into a capricious provision in a law. As soon as the procedure is complied with, there will be an end to everything and the judges will be only spectators. Therefore, my submission is, first, that the words, "except according to procedure established by law" be deleted, and then that the words "without due process of law" be inserted.
     Sir, actually I had sent two amendments, one about the word "personal" before the words `liberty', and the other about substitution of the words "without due process of law" for the words "except according to procedure established by law". But somehow or other, these two amendments have been consolidated, and I am required to move one amendment. Even if my amendment about "personal liberty" is not accepted by the Drafting Committee or Dr. Ambedkar, I do not mind; but the second portion of my amendment should be accepted.
(Amendment No. 524 was not moved.)
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendment No. 525. Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. Do you want to press it?
     Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: Sir, there is a printing mistake which I want to point out.
     Mr. Vice-President: All right. Then we come to No. 528 standing in the names of Shri Upendranath Barman, Shri Damodar Swarup Seth and Shri S. V. Krishnamurthy Rao.
     Kazi Syed Karimuddin: Sir, I have to raise a point of order here. I said in my speech that I have tabled two separate amendments, one regarding the word 'personal' and the other regarding `due process of law'. Both these amendments have been consolidated by mistake of the Secretariat. So I have had to move the second part of my amendment. But then, according to the list supplied to us, No. 528 has been bracketted with No. 523-that is my amendment. I have moved mine, and so No. 528 cannot be moved now, but only put to vote, according to the practice followed in this House.
     Mr. Vice-President: All right. We need not move No.528.
     Shri S. V. Krishnamurthy Rao (My sore): But there is a difference, in that in No. 528 there is no reference to the word `personal', whereas No. 523 refers to deletion of this word.
     Mr. Vice-President: But they are of similar import and I have already given my decision. We shall put No. 528 to vote.
     Then No. 530 in the name of Mr. Z. H. Lari. Do you want it to be put to the vote?
     Mr. Z. H. Lari: (United Provinces: Muslim): Yes, Sir.
     Mr. Vice-President: Then in my list come No. 524, second part, No. 526 and No. 527. These are almost the same. No. 526 may be moved.
     Mahboob Ali Baig Sahib Bahadur (Madras: General): Sir, I beg to move:
     "That in article 15 for the words "except according to procedure established by law" the words, "save in accordance with law" be substituted."
     In the note given by the Drafting Committee, it is stated that they made two changes from the proposition or article passed by this Assembly in the month of August, April or May of 1947. The first is the insertion of the word 'personal' before liberty, and the reason given is that unless this word `personal' finds a place there, the clause may be construed very widely so as to include even the freedoms already dealt with in article 13.
     That is the reason given for the addition of the word 'personal'. As regards why the original words "without due process of law" were omitted and the present words "except according to procedure established by law" are inserted, the reason is stated to be that the expression is more definite and such a provision finds place in article 31 of the Japanese Constitution of 1946. I will try to confine myself to the second change.
     It is no doubt true that in the Japanese Constitution article 31 reads like this but if the other articles that find place in the Japanese Constitution (viz., articles 32, 34 and 35) had also been incorporated in this Draft Constitution that would have been a complete safe guarding of the personal liberty of the citizen. This Draft Constitution has conveniently omitted those provisions.
     Article 32 of the Japanese Constitution provides that "no person shall be denied the right of access to the court." According to the present expression it may be argued that the legislature might pass a law that a person will have no right to go to a court of law to establish his innocence. But according to the Japanese Constitution article 32 clearly says that "no person shall be denied the right of access to the court". Is there such a corresponding provision in this Draft Constitution? That is the question. It does not find any place at all.
     Article 34 of the Japanese Constitution provides that "no person shall be arrested or detained without being at once informed of the charges against him or without the immediate privilege of counsel, nor shall be detained without adequate cause and upon demand of any such person such cause should be immediately shown in open court in his presence and in the presence of his counsel." Such a clear right has not been given in these draft provisions.
     Further, article 35 provides that the right of all persons to be secured in their homes and against entry, searches, etc. shall not be impaired, except upon warrant issued only for probable cause and so on. If for the sake of clarity and definiteness you have imported into this Draft Constitution article 31 of the Japanese Constitution you should in fairness have incorporated the other articles of the Japanese Constitution, which are relevant and which were enacted for safeguarding the personal liberty of the honest citizen. May I ask the Drafting Committee through its Chairman whether it is clear from this constitution that a man who has been arrested and detained has got the right to resort to a court and prove his innocence? It may be said that the expression "except according to procedure established by law" covers the point but the expression means "procedure established by law" of the legislature and it will competent for the legislature to lay down a provision that in the matter of detention of persons whether for political or other reasons, the jurisdiction of the courts is ousted. We know the decisions of the High Courts of India, especially of Madras and some other High Courts, where it has been laid down by these courts that it is open to the legislature to say that the courts shall not interfere with the action taken by the Government in the case of certain citizens whom they consider to be committing an offence or about to commit an offence or are likely to commit an offence. It is not open to the court to go into the merits or demerits of the grounds on which a person has been detained. The only extent to which the courts can go is to find out whether there is bona fides or mala fides for the action of the Government, and the burden is laid upon the person to prove that there is mala fides on the part of the Government in having issued a warrant of detention or arrest. Therefore the words "except according to procedure aid down by law" would mean, and according to me it does mean, that the future legislature might pass a law by which the right of a citizen to be tried by a court to establish his innocence could betaken away. I do not by this mean to convey that under certain circumstances it may not be necessary for Government to prevent a persons from committing an offence and to take the precaution of arresting him and thus prevent him from committing an offence. But I submit that there must be the right of the citizen to go to a court to prove that the ground on which he has been arrested is wrong and he is innocent. That is the elementary right of the citizen as against the executive which might be clothed with power by a party legislature which might pass a law saying that the executive is empowered to take away the liberty of a person under certain circumstances and he will have no right to go to court and prove his innocence. If the framers of the Draft Constitution are able to tell us that these words "except according to procedure established by law" do not deprive a person of his right to go before the court and establish his innocence and he is not prevented from such a course, then it will be another matter. But we must understand that the words "without due process of law" have been held in England and other countries to convey the meaning that every citizen has got the right, when an action has been taken against him depriving him of his personal liberty, to go before the court and say that he is innocent. That right is given under the expression "without due process of law" or "save in accordance with law". In England the law of the land does not deprive a man of this fundamental and elementary right. All laws that may be made are subject to the relevant principle that no man shall be convicted and no man shall be deprived of his liberty without a chance being given to him to prove that he is innocent. Therefore it must be a law, as I have submitted, which will hear him before it condemns a man.
     The only reason which has been advanced in the footnote is that this is more definite and that it finds a place in the Japanese Constitution. As I have already stated, let us not sacrifice the liberty of the subject to prove his innocence, by resorting to the provisions of the Japanese Act and not complete that right of the citizen to be tried-that liberty-by omitting the other provisions of the Japanese Act. I shall be satisfied if all the provisions of the Japanese Constitution find a place here. because the other provisions clearly state that no person can be deprived of his liberty without his being given the chance to go to court and all assistance given to him. I therefore object to the words" except according to procedure established by law." If by any other method which may be said to be definite provision they can ensure that the citizen cannot be condemned without being heard by a court, I shall be satisfied. That is my reason for moving this amendment.
     Mr. Vice-President: Amendments Nos. 529 and 531 are disallowed as verbal amendments.
(Amendment No. 533 was not moved.)
     We can now proceed with the general discussion on article 15.
     Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava (East Punjab: General): Sir, I sent an amendment No. 525, which I wanted to amend by amendment No. 9 on List No. 1 (Third week). This and amendment No. 528 are the same. The amendment which has been moved by Mr. Karimuddin differs from these in so far as that the word "personal" before the word "liberty" does not appear in his amendment. I am opposed to the amendment of Mr. Karimuddin. The section as it is, with this amendment namely the substitution of the words "without due process of law" for the words "except according to procedure established by law" is the one which I wish to support.
     In this connection the first question that arises is what is the meaning of the word 'law'? According to the general connotation of the word, so widely accepted and the connotation which has been given to this word by Austin, law means an Act enacted by the legislatures whereas I submit that when Dicey used his words "law of the land" he meant law in another meaning.
      Similarly, when the Japanese Constitution and other Constitutions used this word in the broad sense they meant to convey by the word 'law' universal principles of justice etc.
     According to the present section procedure is held sacrosanct whereas the word 'law' really connotes both procedural law as well as substantive law. I have used the word 'law' in the general sense. Though these words "without due process of law" which are sought to be substituted for the words in the section have not been defined anywhere, their meanings and implications should be understood fully. By using these words "without due process of law" we want that the courts may be authorised to go into the question of the substantive law as well as procedural law. When an enactment is enacted, according to the amendment now proposed to be passed by this House, the courts will have the right to go into the question whether a particular law enacted by parliament is just or not, whether it is good or not, whether as a matter of fact it protects the liberties of the people or not. If the Supreme Court comes to the conclusion that it is unconstitutional, that the law is unreasonable or unjust, then in that case the courts will hold the law to be such and that law will not have any further effect.
     As regards procedure also, if any legislature takes it into its head to divest itself of the ordinary rights of having a good procedural law in this country, to that extent the court will be entitled to say whether the procedure is just or not. This is within the meaning of the word 'law' as it is used in this amendment and as it is generally used. The word 'law' has also not been defined in this Constitution. For the purpose of article 8 the word `law' has been defined. Otherwise it has not been defined. I would therefore submit that if the words as used in the section remained, namely `procedure established by law', we will have to find out what is the meaning of the word `law'. These words would remain vague and it will result in misconceptions and misconstructions. Therefore, unless and until we understand the meaning of "due process of law" we will not be doing justice to the amendment proposed. I therefore want to suggest that the words "due process of law" without being defined convey to us a sense as used in the American law as opposed to other laws. What will be the effect of this change? To illustrate this I would refer the House to Act XIV of 1908 called the Black Law under which thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of Congressmen were sent to jail. According to Act XIV of 1908 the Government took to themselves the powers of declaring any  organisation illegal by the mere fact that they passed a notification to that effect. This Act, when passed, was condemned by the whole of India. But the Government of the day enacted it in the teeth of full opposition. When the non-co-operation movement began it was civil disobedience of this law with which the Congress fought its battle. The Courts could not hold that the notification of the Government was wrong. The courts were not competent to hold that any organisation or association of persons was legal though its objects were legal. The objects of the Congress were peaceful. They wanted to attain self-government but by peaceful and legitimate means. All the same, since the Government had notified, the courts were helpless. This legislation demonstrates the need of the powers of "due process."
     Similarly I will give another illustration, and that is Section 26 of the Defence of India Act. We know that the Federal Court held this Section to be illegal and a new Ordinance had to be issued. Unless and until therefore you invest the court with such power and make this Section 15 really justifiable there is no guarantee that we will enjoy the freedoms that the Constitution wants to confer upon us.
     The House has already accepted the word "reasonable" in article 13. At least 70 per cent of the Acts which can evolve personal liberty have now come under the jurisdiction of the courts, and the courts are competent to pronounce an opinion on such laws, whether they are reasonable or not. The House is now stopped from adopting another principle. In regard to personal property and life the question is much more important. So far as the question of life and personal liberty are concerned they must be also under the category of subjects which are within the jurisdiction of the courts.
     Therefore it is quite necessary that the House should accept this amendment. There are two ways, as suggested by the previous speakers: either you must put all the sections as in the Japanese Constitution, and we should pass many of the amendments tabled by Messrs. Lari and Karimuddin one of which you were pleased to declare carried in the first instance and which was later declared lost. They seek to introduce into the Constitution principles which the legislature will in future be unable to contravene. All those amendments regarding Fundamental Rights will be carried ipso facto if this one amendment of "due process" is accepted. Another thing which will be achieved by the acceptance of this one amendment is a recognition in this Constitution of the real genius of the people. In the old days we have heard of seven or eight Rishis, all very pious and intelligent people, holding real power in the land. To them, well versed in the Shastras, the ministers and the ancient kings went for advice. Those Rishis controlled the whole field of administration. This old ideal will practically be achieved if the full bench of the Supreme Court Judges well versed in law and procedure and possessing concentrated wisdom had the final say in regard to peoples' rights.
     Mr. Vice-President: The honourable Member's time is up.
     Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava: I have to say many things more, Sir. I know the argument against this amendment is that these words `due process of law' are not certain or clear. But may I know what is the exact meaning of the word `morality' put in this Constitution.
     Mr. Vice-President: I ask the indulgence of the honourable Member. I intimated to him twice that he has exhausted his time. I have half a dozen notes from people competent to speak on this point. I am quite certain that it is not the wish of the honourable Member to curtail the time which I can allow them.
     Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava: I do not want to curtail the time of the others.
     Mr. Vice-President: Then you may have two minutes more.
     Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava: Thank you, Sir.
     Shri Upendranath Barman: (West Bengal: General): May I say a few words at this stage, Sir?
     Mr. Vice-President: I am sorry I cannot oblige the honourable Member.
     Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava: As I was saying, Sir, many other words used in this Constitution have an uncertain meaning. The words 'decency' and `morality' have not got a definite meaning.
     Then, Sir, it is said this will tend to weaken the administration by the uncertainties which will be imported if this amendment is carried. But, Sir, our liberties will be certain through the particular law which may be reviewed by the court may become uncertain. The administration will not be weakened thereby. I grant that it may probably be that the administration will not have its way. But we want to have a Government which will respect the liberties of the citizens of India. As a matter of fact, if this amendment is carried, it will constitute the bed-rock of our liberties. This will be a Magna Carta along with article 13 with the word `reasonable' in it. This is only victory for the judiciary over the autocracy of the legislature. In fact we want two bulwarks for our liberties. One is the Legislature and the other is the judiciary. But even if the legislature is carried away by party spirit and is sometimes panicky the judiciary will save us from the tyranny of the legislature and the executive.
     In a democracy, the courts are the ultimate refuge of the citizens for the vindication of their rights and liberties. I want the judiciary to be exalted to its right position of palladium of justice and the people to be secure in their rights and liberties under its protecting wings.
     I commend my amendment and beg the House to pass it.
     Shri Chimanlal Chakkubhai Shah [United States of Kathiawar (Saurashtra)]: Mr. Vice-President, Sir, the right conferred by article 15 is the most fundamental of the Fundamental Rights in this Chapter, because it is the right which relates to life and personal liberty without which all other rights will be meaningless. Therefore, it is necessary that in defining this right, we must make it clear and explicit as to what it is that we want to confer and not put in restrictions upon the exercise of that right which make it useless or nugatory. I therefore support the amendment which says that the words `without due process of law' should be substituted for the words `except in accordance with the procedure established by law.' Sir, the words 'without due process of law' have been taken from the American Constitution and they have come to acquire a particular connotation. That connotation is that in reviewing legislation, the court will have the power to see not only that the procedure is followed, namely, that the warrant is in accordance with law or that the signature and the seal are there, but it has also the power to see that the substantive provisions of law are fair and just and not unreasonable or oppressive or capricious or arbitrary. That means that the judiciary is given power to review legislation. In America that kind of power which has been given to the judiciary undoubtedly led to an amount of conservative outlook on the part of the judiciary and to uncertainly in legislation. But our article is in two respects entirely different from the article in the American Constitution. In the American Constitution, the words are used in connection with life, liberty and property. In this article we have omitted the word 'property', because on account of the use of this word in the American Constitution, there has been a good deal of litigation and uncertainty. There has been practically no litigation and no uncertainty as regards the interpretation of the words "due process of law" as applied to `life' and 'liberty'.
     Secondly, Sir, in the word `liberty' that we have used, we have added the word `personal' and made it `personal liberty' to make it clear that this article does not refer to any kind of liberty of contract or anything of that kind, but relates only to life and liberty of person. Therefore, it would be wrong to say that the words `due process of law' are likely to lead to any uncertainty in legislation or unnecessary interference by the judiciary in reviewing legislation.
     Sir, in all Federal Constitutions, the judiciary has undoubtedly the power which at times allows it to review legislation. This is inherent in all Federal Constitutions. In England, for example, the judiciary can never say that a law passed by Parliament is unconstitutional. All it can do is to interpret it. But in Federal Constitutions the judiciary has the power to say that a law is unconstitutional. In several articles of this Constitution, we have ourselves provided for this and given express powers to the judiciary to pronounce any law to be unconstitutional or beyond the powers of the legislature. I have no doubt in my mind that this is a very salutary check on the arbitrary exercise of any power by the executive.
     Sir, at times it does happen that the executive requires extraordinary powers to deal with extraordinary situations and they can pass emergency laws. The legislature, which is generally controlled by the executive-because it is the majority that forms the executive-gives such powers to the executive in moments of emergency. Therefore, it is but proper that we should give the right to the judiciary to review legislation.
     It may be said that the judiciary may, in times of crisis, not be able to appreciate fully the necessities which have required such kind of legislation. But I have no such apprehension. I have no doubt that the judiciary will take into account fully the necessities of a situation which have required the legislature to pass such a law. But it has happened at times that the law is so comprehensive that the individual is deprived of life and liberty without any opportunity of defence. What is the worst that can happen in an article like this if we put in the words `without due process of law'? Some man may escape death or jail if the judiciary takes the view that the law is oppressive. Sir, is it not better that nine guilty men may escape than one innocent man suffers? That is the worst that can happen even if the judiciary takes a wrong view.
     But, in these days, the executive is naturally anxious to have more and more powers and it gets them. And we have developed a kind of legislation which is called delegated legislation in which the powers are given to subordinate officers to issue warrants and the like. For example, under the Public Safety Measures Acts, if a Commissioner of Police is satisfied that a particular man is acting against the interests of the State or is dangerous to public security, he could detain the man without trial.
     We know it to our cost that even the Commissioner of Police does not look into these matters personally as he is expected to do and signs or issues warrants on the reports of subordinate officials. It is better under such circumstances that there is some checkup on the exercise of such powers if they are arbitrarily used. I therefore fully support the amendment which seeks to substitute the words "without due process of law" in place of the words which have been used in the Article. As Mr. Mahboob Ali Baig has rightly pointed out, these words are taken from the Japanese Constitution but the Drafting Committee has omitted the other provisions which give meaning to these words. Mr. Baig's amendment which seeks to substitute the words "save in accordance with law", I am afraid, will not serve his own purpose. If he has in mind that the full import of all the provisions of the Japanese Constitution read along with the one which the Drafting Committee has put in, should be brought out here, it is better that he accepts the words, "without due process of law", rather than the words "save in accordance with law" which are taken from the Irish Constitution and which probably have the same meaning as the words put in by the Drafting Committee. I therefore fully support amendment No.528.
Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma (United Provinces. General): Mr. Vice-President, Sir, my amendment No. 523 sought the substitution of the words "without due process of law" for the words "except according to procedure established by law". This article guarantees the personal liberty and life of the citizen. In democratic life, liberty is guaranteed through law. Democracy means nothing except that instead of the rule by an individual, whether a king or a despot, or a multitude, we will have the rule of the law. Sir, the term "without due process of law" has a necessary limitation on the powers of the State, both executive and legislative. The doctrine implied by "without due process of law" has a long history in Anglo-American law. It does not lay down a specific rule of but it implies a fundamental principle of justice. These words have nowhere been defined either in the English Constitution or in the American Constitution but we can find their meaning through reading the various antecedents of this expression. As a matter of fact, it can be traced back to the days of King John when the barons wrung their charter from him, i.e., the Magna Carta. The expression "Per Legum Terrea" in the Magna Carta have come to mean "without due process of law". Chapter 39 of the Charter says:-
     "No free man shall be taken, or imprisoned, diseased, or outlawed, exiled, or in any way destroyed; nor shall we go upon him, nor send upon him, but by the lawful judgment of his peers or by the law of the land."
     These words were used again in 1331, 1351 and 1355. Statute No. 28 during the reign of Edward III says:-
     "No man of what state or condition so ever he be, shall be put out of his lands or tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor indicated, nor put to death, without he be brought to answer by due process of law".
     Sir, in the American Constitution, these words were first used in 1791:-
     "Nor shall any person . . . . . be deprived of life, liberty or property, without due process of law".
     What this phrase means is to guarantee a fair trial both in procedure as well as in substance. The procedure should be in accordance with law and should be appealable to the civilised conscience of the community. It also ensures a fair trial in substance, that is to say, that substantive law itself should be just and appealable to the civilised conscience of the community. Sir, various decisions of the American Supreme Court, when analysed, will stress the four fundamental principles that a fair trial must be given, second, the court or agency which takes jurisdiction in the case must be duly authorised by law to such prerogative, third that the defendant must be allowed an opportunity to present his side of the case and fourth that certain assistance including counsel and the confronting of witnesses must be extended. These four fundamental points guarantee a fair trail in substance.
     As to social progress, my Friend Pandit Bhargava has already spoken and I need not repeat the argument here; but for your enlightenment I would like to read a judgment which clarifies the position. The judgment runs (from Willoughby on the Constitution of the United States, p.1692):
     "Thus, for example, in 1875, in Loan Association v. Topeka the Court said:
     "It must be conceded that there are such rights in every free government beyond the control of the state, a government which recognised no such rights, which held the lives, the liberty and the property of its citizens subject at all times to the absolute disposition and unlimited control of even the most democratic depository of power is, after all, a despotism.......The theory of our governments, state or municipal, is opposed to the deposit of unlimited power anywhere. The executive, the legislative and the judicial branches of these governments are all of limited and defined powers. There are limitations on such power which grow out of the essential nature of all free governments-implied reservations of individual rights, without which the social compact could not exist, and which are respected by all governments entitled to the name. No court, for instance, would hesitate to declare void a statute which enacted that A and B who were husband and wife to each other should be so no longer, but that A should thereafter be the husband of C, and B the wife of D, or which should enact that the home stead now owned by A should henceforth be the property of B."
     Sir, with these words I support the amendment.
    Shri H. V. Pataskar (Bombay: General): Mr. Vice-President, I have come forward only to take a few minutes of the House for supporting the amendment No. 528 which wants to substitute "except according to procedure established by law" by the words "without due process of law". Already the legal aspect of this matter has been discussed at length in this House, but I want to place it before the House from another point of view. We are, Sir, at the present moment in a state which is going to be a democracy. Now, democracy implies party Government and party Government, in our country, is rather new and we have instances which lead us to think that the party machine at work is likely to prescribe procedures which are going to lead to the nullification of the provisions which we have made in the Fundamental Rights, which are being given to the people. We know from experience that in certain provinces there are already legislations which have been enacted and which prescribe certain procedures for detention, which have come in for criticism by the public in a very vehement manner. I therefore, submit, Sir, that it is very essential from the point of view of the right of personal liberty, that the words "due process of law" should be particularly there. With these words, Sir, I support the amendment and would not like to repeat what has been said in favour of this amendment already.
     Shri K. M. Munshi : Mr. Vice-President, Sir, I want to support amendment No. 528 which seeks to incorporate the words "without due process of law" in substitution of the words "except according to procedure established by law". In my humble opinion, if the clause stood as it is, it would have no meaning at all, because if the procedure prescribed by law were not followed by the courts, there would be the appeal court in every case, to set things right. This clause would only have meaning if the courts could examine not merely that the conviction has been according to law or according to proper procedure, but that the procedure as well as the substantive part of the law are such as would be proper and justified by the circumstances of the case. We want to set up a democracy; the House has said it over and over again; and the essence of democracy is that a balance must be struck between individual liberty on the one hand and social control on the other. We must not forget that the majority in a legislature is more anxious to establish social control than to serve individual liberty. Some scheme therefore must be devised to adjust the needs of individual liberty and the demands of social control. Eminent American constitutional lawyers are agreed on the point that no better scheme could have been evolved to strike a balance between the two. Of course, as the House knows, lawyers delight to disagree and there is a certain volume of opinion against it in America, but as pointed out by my honourable Friend, Mr. C. C. Shah, we have made drastic changes in the American clause. The American clause says that no person shall be deprived of his life, liberty or property without due process of law. That clause created great difficulties with regard to laws relating to property. That word has been omitted. The word `liberty' was construed widely so as to cover liberty of contract and that word has been qualified. This clause is now restricted to liberty of the person, that is, nobody can be convicted, sent to jailor be sentenced to death without due process of law. That is the narrow meaning of this clause which is now sought to be incorporated by amendment No. 528.
     Now, the question we have to consider, I submit, is only this. What are the implications of this `due process'? Due process' is now confined to personal liberty. This clause would enable the courts to examine not only the procedural part, the jurisdiction of the court, the jurisdiction of the legislature, but also the substantive law. When a law has been passed which entitles Government to take away the personal liberty of an individual, the court will consider whether the law which has been passed is such as is required by the exigencies of the case, and, therefore, as I said, the balance will be struck between individual liberty and the social control. In the result, Governments will have to go to the court of law and justify why a particular measure infringing the personal liberty of the citizen has been imposed. As a matter of fact, the fear that in America the 'due process' clause has upset legislative measures, is not correct. I have not got the figures here, but I remember to have read it some where in over 90 per cent of the cases on the 'due process' clause which have gone to the American courts, action of the legislatures has been upheld. In such matters involving personal liberty Governments had to go before the court and justify the need for passing the legislation under which the person complaining was convicted. In a democracy it is necessary that there should be given an opportunity to the Governments to vindicate the measures that they take. Apart from anything else, it is a whole some thing that a Government is given an opportunity to justify its action in a court of law.
     I know some honourable Members have got a feeling that in view of the emergent conditions in this country this clause may lead to disastrous consequences. With great respect I have not been able to agree with this view (Interruption). Take even our Public Safety Acts in the provinces. In view of the condition in the country they would certainly be upheld by the court of law and even if one out of several acts is not upheld, even then, I am sure, nothing is going to happen. Human ingenuity supported by the legislature and assisted by the able lawyers of each province will be sufficient to legislate in such a manner that law and order could be maintained.
     Therefore, my submission is that this clause is necessary for this purpose and is not likely to be abused. We have, unfortunately, in this country legislatures with large majorities, facing very severe problems, and naturally, there is a tendency to pass legislation in a hurry which give sweeping powers to the executive and the police. Now, there will be no deterrent if these legislations are not examined by a court of law. For instance, I read the other day that there is going to be a legislation, or there is already a legislation, in one province in India which denies to the accused the assistance of lawyer. How is that going to be checked? In another province, I read that the certificate or report of an executive authority--mind you it is not a Secretary of a Government, but a subordinate executive--is conclusive evidence of a fact. This creates tremendous difficulties for the accused and I think, as I have submitted, there must be some agency in a democracy which strikes a balance between individual liberty and social control. 
     Our emergency at the moment has perhaps led us to forget that if we do not give that scope to individual liberty, and give it the protection of the courts, we will create a tradition which will ultimately destroy even whatever little of personal liberty which exists in this country. I therefore submit, Sir, that this amendment should be accepted.
     Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar (Madras: General): Mr. Vice-President, Sir, the debate on this article reveals that there seems to be a leaning on the part of a good number of members in this House in favour of the expression `due process' being retained and not for substituting the expression `procedure established by law', which is the expression suggested by the Drafting Committee in its last stage. I am using the words `in its last stage' because my honourable Friend Mr. Munshi has taken the opposite view.
     Sir, at least in justification of the change suggested by the Drafting Committee, I owe it to myself, to my colleagues and the respected Chairman of the Drafting Committee, to say a few words, because, up to the last moment, presumably, the House is open to conviction.
     The expression 'due process' itself as interpreted by the English Judges connoted merely the due course of legal proceedings according to the rules and forms established for the protection of rights, and a fair trial in a court of justice according to the modes of proceeding applicable to the case. Possibly, if the expression has been understood according to its original content and according to the interpretation of English Judges, there might be no difficulty at all. The expression, however, as developed in the United States Supreme Court, has acquired a different meaning and import in a long course of American judicial decisions. Today, according to Professor Will is, the expression means, what the Supreme Court says what it means in any particular case. It is just possible, some ardent democrats may have a greater faith in the judiciary than in the conscious will expressed through the enactment of a popular legislature. Three gentlemen or five gentlemen, sitting as a court of law, and stating what exactly is due process according to them in any particular case, after listening to long discourses and arguments of briefed counsel on either side, may appeal to certain democrats more than the expressed wishes of the legislature or the action of an executive responsible to the legislature. In the development of the doctrine of `due process', the United States Supreme Court has not adopted a consistent view at all and the decisions are conflicting. One decision very often reversed another decision. I would challenge any member of the Bar with a deep knowledge of the cases in the United States Supreme Court to say that there is anything like uniformity in regard to the interpretation of `due process'. One has only to take the index in the Law Reports Annotated Edition for fifteen years and compare the decisions of one year with the decisions of another year and he will come to the conclusion that it has no definite import. It all depended upon the particular Judges that presided on the occasion. Justice Holmes took a view favourable to social control. There were other Judges of a Tory complexion who took a strong view in favour of individual liberty and private property. There is no sort of uniformity at all in the decisions of the United States Supreme Court.
     Some of my honourable Friends have spoken as if it merely applied to cases of detention and imprisonment. The Minimum Wage Law or a Restraint on Employment have in some cases been regarded as an invasion of personal liberty and freedom, by the United States Supreme Court in its earlier decisions, the theory being that it is an essential part of personal liberty that every person in the world be she a woman, be he a child over fourteen years of age or be he a labourer, has the right to enter into any contract he or she liked and it is not the province of other people to interfere with that liberty. On that ground, in the earlier decisions of the Supreme Court it has been held that the Minimum Wage Laws are invalid as invading personal liberty. In recent times I quite realise, after the New Deal, the swing of the pendulum has been other way. Even there, there has not been any consistency or any uniformity. I hope that if this amendment is carried, in the interpretation of this clause our Supreme Court will not follow American precedence especially in the earlier stages but will mould the interpretation to suit the conditions of India and the progress and well-being of the country. This clause may serve as a great handicap for all social legislation, for the ultimate relationship between employer and lab our, for the protection of children, and for the protection of women. It may prove fairly alright if only the Judges move with the times and bring to bear their wisdom on particular issues. But since the British days we have inherited a kind of faith in lawyers, legal arguments, legal consultations and in courts; I, for my part, having flourished in the law, have no quarrel with those people who believe in the lawyer. In the earlier stages of American history, lawyers ranged themselves on the side of great Trusts and Combines and in favour of Corporations who were in a position to fee them very well, sometimes in the name of personal liberty, sometimes in the name of protection of property. After all the word `personal liberty' has not the same content and meaning as is imported into it by some of our friends who naturally feel very sensitive about people being detained without a proper trial. I equally feel it but that is not the meaning of personal liberty attributed by the American Courts in the context of `due process'. I trust that the House will take into account the various aspects of this question, the future progress of India, the well-being and the security of the States, the necessity of maintaining a minimum of liberty, the need for co-ordinating social control and personal liberty, before coming to a decision. One thing also will have to be taken into account, viz., that the security of the State is far from being so secure as we are imagining at present. Take for example the normal detention cases. I may tell you as a lawyer, I am against the man being detained without his being given an opportunity; but an opportunity is not necessarily given in a court of law, as a result of argument, as a result of evidence, as a result of examination or cross-examination. Today I know in Madras a Special Committee has been appointed consisting of a Judge of the High Court, the Advocate-General of Madras and another person to go into the cases of detention and to find out whether there are proper materials or not. Now all these cases might have to go to Courts of law and possibly it is a good thing for lawyers. Though I am getting old I do not despair of taking part in those contests even in the future.
     The support which the amendment has received reveals the great faith which the Legislature and Constitution makers have in the Judiciary of the land. The Drafting Committee in suggesting "procedure" for "due process of law" was possibly guilty of being apprehensive of judicial vagaries in the moulding of law. The Drafting Committee has made the suggestion and it is ultimately for the House to come to the conclusion whether that is correct, taking into consideration the security of the State, the need for the liberty of the individual and the harmony between the two. I am still open to conviction and if other arguments are forthcoming I might be influenced to come to a different conclusion.
     Mr. Z. H. Lari : Mr. Vice-President, the last speaker who has spoken on this article has drawn the attention of the House to dangers to the State which are likely to arise if the article as it stands is amended by the amendment No.528 or 530. I have not got that experience which the learned speaker has but with the little knowledge of the working of the Legislatures during the last ten years, I can say that it is necessary not only in the interest of individual liberty but in the interest of proper working of legislatures that such a clause as due process of law clause should find a place in the Constitution. It is open to that speaker at the fag end of his life as a lawyer to have a fling at the profession of law but I can say that assistance of lawyers is absolutely essential to secure justice.
     Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar: On a point of order. I had no fling at the profession of law.
     Mr. Z. H. Lari: I stand corrected.
     I feel that two things are necessary. We all know that the State, these days, is all-powerful. Its coercive processes extend to the utmost limits but still there is a phase of life which must be above the processes of Executive Government, and that is individual liberty. In America no such word as `personal' existed. There the word liberty alone existed and possibly in that state of things, it was possible to interpret it in such a way as to extend the scope of due process of law to other spheres of life but when the word `personal liberty' has been definitely inserted in the clause, I doubt whether any Court which is conscious of the requirements of a State as well as conscious of the necessities of individual liberty, will be so uncharitable to the interest of the State as to interpret it in a way to thwart the proper working of the State. My friend admitted that in the latter rulings in America itself there has been a recognition of the necessities of the State and the word has been interpreted in such a way as not to obstruct the proper working of the State. My submission would be that in this land our Supreme Court will recognise the limits of individual liberty as well as the necessities of the State and interpret it in such a way as to ensure individual liberty of a man.
     Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava: The Drafting Committee also said so in their note.
     Mr. Z. H. Lari: My friend is right; and the only reason which was given by the Drafting Committee of which the honourable Speaker who preceded me was a member also, was that the words `due process of law' is not specific and the word as was used in the Japanese Constitution is more specific. No doubt the words as they stand in the Japanese Constitution are specific because the procedure is indicated and definitely laid down there. What is the essence of the due process of law? I think they are two. First is, enquiry before you condemn a man. And then there is judgment after trial. If any procedure which is adopted by any legislature provides for the hearing of a person who is suspected or is accused, and then after a proper hearing, enables him to get the benefit of a judgment based on that enquiry, my submission is, that the requirements of the due process of law are complied with. And I would beg of the House to consider whether in any country, however emergent and however unstable its conditions, is it necessary or is it not necessary that every individual citizen should feel that he will be heard before he is condemned, and that he will be dealt with in the light of the judgment based on the enquiries and not be subject to arbitrary detention? The House will also remember that lately there was the question of drafting human rights, and already such a draft has been prepared. And one of the clauses therein is that nobody should be subjected to arbitrary detention. Now, what is the way to prevent arbitrary detention? If you have the words in this clause, as they stand at present, namely, `procedure established by law' it means that the legislature is all-powerful and whatever procedure is deemed proper under the circumstances will be binding upon the courts. But, Sir, there are certain procedures which are the inherent rights of man and the should not be infringed upon by any legislative Assembly. Men as well as assemblies, or any mass of people are subject to passing emotions, and you will realise that in the present state of things, particularly keeping in view the constitution that we are going to have, namely, a parliamentary government, the legislature is controlled by a Cabinet, which means by the executive. You have also the provisions about having ordinances which means that the cabinet--a body consisting of eight to ten persons--decide upon a particular course of action, issue as an ordinance, and, the legislature then has to approve of it, otherwise it would amount to a vote of censure. Therefore the legislature in the last analysis means only the cabinet or the executive and nothing but the executive. The question before us is whether you are going to give such powers to the Executive which can infringe even the elementary rights of a person, the elementary rights of personal liberty, or whether you should not put certain checks on the executive which can be done only if you accept the amendment which has been moved by a Congress member, i.e., amendment No. 528. My amendment No. 530 is exactly similar.
     My friend who spoke on the other side gave instances of legislation in the British period, of rights which were curtailed, and of innocent persons jailed. But I submit with all humility, that every legislature and every government is liable to do such things which the British Government did. You cannot excuse excess of law simply because those excesses are committed by a popularly elected legislature. That is why there are two domains, one is the domain of individual liberty, and the other domain is where the State comes in to regulate our life. What do you leave to the State? You leave to the State everything except personal liberty. As to stability of the State my submission would be that if there are classes or communities which are prone to violence, there are sufficient provisions in this Constitution to deal with them--they are in article 13.There, the State can come in and curtail the liberty of such persons, and even nullify their activities. What can an individual do? If there are parties which have got objectives which run counter to the stability of the State, you have already got enough provisions where-by the State can declare those bodies unlawful. But this particular clause deals with a very small sphere of action, namely, personal liberty. My submission is that our State is not so weak as to be subverted by the activities of a particular individual, and mark that, that individual will not have the liberty to do everything. He can be brought before a court. He can be judged in a court of law; no doubt, he will have the assistance of counsel and the Government will have the obligation to produce evidence against him. Does this amount to curtailing the powers of the State? Does this amount to subverting the State? Does it amount to annihilating the State? With all respect to the previous speaker, I feel he took a very uncharitable view of the citizens of our State, and took a still more uncharitable view of the strength of the State which will emerge after the promulgation of the new Constitution. No doubt, we have to go by realities. We have to take into consideration stern facts. But I may remind the House of one thing. In America, this clause is accepted and is reproduced in the Japanese Constitution. You know the Americans have been responsible for framing the Japanese Constitution. A constitution for a fascist country, a country where individuals are prone to violence--they wanted to overthrow the peace of the world--when they were drafting a constitution for such a country, composed of such citizens, they laid down clauses 31, 32, 33 and 34 which say that nobody shall be denied access to courts, nobody shall be arrested unless causes are shown against him, and nobody shall be denied the privilege of the assistance of counsel. May I say that if the framers of this latest constitution, based on experience and knowing the nature of the people living in Japan, who are not a very peace-loving people as was demonstrated in the last war, have accepted these provisions, that means that these provisions have stood the test of time and have safeguarded the liberty of the individual and also guaranteed the integrity of the state. There are two things by which we have to go. One is experience of others. No doubt, every clause can be criticised in one way or other. But we have to be guided by experience. Here is the experience of other countries, and this has shown that the words `due process of law' can exist without jeopardising the existence of the State. Secondly, we know that not only here, but throughout the world every assembly is likely to misuse its power. It is bound to happen. Power corrupts. We should profit by the experience of other countries and by what has been observed for centuries. Or should we go by the ipse dixit of X, Y, Z who says that there seems to be some germ of disruption in this clause? My submission is that it is only making a bogey out of nothing. We should not be led away by this bogey into accepting this clause. If this clause is accepted, then the whole Constitution becomes lifeless. The article, as it stands, is lifeless and it makes also the whole Constitution lifeless. Unless you accept this amendment, you would not earn the gratitude of future generations. Therefore, Sir, I pray that this motion which has been supported by several members should be accepted.
     With these words, Sir, I support the amendment.
Article 15
     Mr. Vice-President : With the permission of the House, I should like to revert to an article left over: that is article 15. I have before me the proceedings of the House from which it appears--this was considered on the 6th December last--that general discussion had concluded and I had called upon Dr. Ambedkar to reply. At that time it was suggested that efforts should be made to arrive at some kind of understanding so that those who had submitted certain amendments might feel satisfied. I do not know the position now; but we cannot wait any longer. Dr. Ambedkar, will you please make the position clear? If no understanding has been arrived at, I would ask you to reply.
     The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Mr. Vice-President, I must confess that I am somewhat in a difficult position with regard to article 15 and the amendment moved by my Friend Pandit Bhargava for the deletion of the words "procedure according to law" and the substitution of the words "due process".
     It is quite clear to any one who has listened to the debate that has taken place last time that there are two sharp points of view. One point of view says that "due process of law" must be there in this article; otherwise the article is a nugatory one. The other point of view is that the existing phraseology is quite sufficient for the purpose. Let me explain what exactly "due process" involves.
     The question of "due process" raises, in my judgment, the question of the relationship between the legislature and the judiciary. In a federal constitution, it is always open to the judiciary to decide whether any particular law passed by the legislature is ultra vires or intra vires in reference to the powers of legislation which are granted by the Constitution to the particular legislature. If the law made by a particular legislature exceeds the authority of the power given to it by the Constitution, such law would be ultra vires and invalid. That is the normal thing that happens in all federal constitutions. Every law in a federal constitution, whether made by the Parliament at the Centre or made by the legislature of a State, is always subject to examination by the judiciary from the point of view of the authority of the legislature making the law. The 'due process' clause, in my judgment, would give the judiciary the power to question the law made by the legislature on another ground. That ground would be whether that law is in keeping with certain fundamental principles relating to the rights of the individual. In other words, the judiciary would be endowed with the authority to question the law not merely on the ground whether it was in excess of the authority of the legislature, but also on the ground whether the law was good law, apart from the question of the powers of the legislature making the law. The law may be perfectly good and valid so far as the authority of the legislature is concerned. But, it may not be a good law, that is to say, it violates certain fundamental principles; and the judiciary would have that additional power of declaring the law invalid. The question which arises in considering this matter is this. We have no doubt given the judiciary the power to examine the law made by different legislative bodies on the ground whether that law is in accordance with the powers given to it. The question now raised by the introduction of the phrase 'due process' is whether the judiciary should be given the additional power to question the laws made by the State on the ground that they violate certain fundamental principles.
     There are two views on this point. One view is this; that the legislature may be trusted not to make any law which would abrogate the fundamental rights of man, so to say, the fundamental rights which apply to every individual, and consequently, there is no danger arising from the introduction of the phrase 'due process'. Another view is this: that it is not possible to trust the legislature; the legislature is likely to err, is likely to be led away by passion, by party prejudice, by party considerations, and the legislature may make a law which may abrogate what may be regarded as the fundamental principles which safeguard the individual rights of a citizen. We are therefore placed in two difficult positions. One is to give the judiciary the authority to sit in judgment over the will of the legislature and to question the law made by the legislature on the ground that it is not good law, in consonance with fundamental principles. Is that a desirable principle? The second position is that the legislature ought to be trusted not to make bad laws. It is very difficult to come to any definite conclusion. There are dangers on both sides. For myself I cannot altogether omit the possibility of a Legislature packed by party men making laws which may abrogate or violate what we regard as certain fundamental principles affecting the life and liberty of an individual. At the same time, I do not see how five or six gentlemen sitting in the Federal or Supreme Court examining laws made by the Legislature and by dint of their own individual conscience or their bias or their prejudices be trusted to determine which law is good and which law is bad. It is rather a case where a man has to sail between Charybdis and Scylla and I therefore would not say anything. I would leave it to the House to decide in any way it likes.
     Mr. Vice-President : I shall now put the amendments one by one to vote. No. 523.
     The question is:--
     "That in article 15, for the words "No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law" the words "No person shall be deprived of his life or liberty without due process of law" be substituted."
The amendment was negatived.
     Mr. Vice-President : The question is--
     "That in article 15, for the words "except according to procedure established by law" the words "due process of law" be substituted."
The amendment was negatived.
     Mr. Vice-President : No. 528.
     Shri S. V. Krishnamurthy Rao (Mysore): I do not press it.
     The amendment was, by leave of the Assembly, withdrawn.
     Mr. Vice-President: No. 530.
     The question is:--
     "That in article 15, for the words "procedure established by law" the words "due process of law" be substituted."
The amendment was negatived.
     Mr. Vice-President : No. 526
     The question is:--
     "That in article 15 for the words "except according to procedure established by law" the words "save in accordance with law" be substituted."
The amendment was negatived.
     Mr. Vice-President : No. 527.
     The question is:--
     "That in article 15 for the words "except according to procedure established by law" the words "except in accordance with law" be substituted."
The amendment was negatived.
     Mr. Vice-President : I shall put the article to vote.
     The question is:--
     That article 15 stand part of the Constitution.
The motion was adopted.
Article 15 was added to the Constitution.

