CENSUS OF INDIA, 1951
VOLUME I

IN 0 I A
PAHT I-A -

REPOI~T

R. A. GOPALASW AMI,
OF ITIE INDIAN CIVIL SERVICE,

Registrar General, India and ex-officio Ce1lSus Commissioner for India

p

. CC. 48. I. I(a)
',000

Prl {, e
Ordinary

Delu:re
PART I-A _. Report

Rs. 10/- or 16 sh.

Rs. 3/- or 5 sh.

PART I-B -Appendices

Rs. 10/- or 16 sh.

Rs. 3/- or 5 sl1.

PARTS I-A & I-B (coinbined)

Rs. 15/- or 23 sh 6 d. R..,. 5/- or 8 sh.

PRINTED I'i !NDIA BY THE MANAGER. GOVT. OF INnIA PRESS, NEW DELHI

AND PUBLISHED

DY

THE

MANAGER

OF

PU8UCATIONS.

DELHl,

1953

FEW PEOPLE OUTSIDE realise that census is

an administrative operation oj great di'mensions
and, in additi'on, it is a sci'rmific process.
Indian census, in particular, covers the largest
populati'on in the 'World and it is also one of
the most economical administrative operations.
Census as an institution goes back to the remote
past, but it is no longer a mere counting of
heads; it involves extraction of information
which plays a vital role in the determimuion
of many of our administrative policies. The
facts el£czted during the course of this operation
yield valuable scientific data of sociological
importance. In many matters it provides a
useful guide for the effectiveness or otherwise
of our economic policies. The theory of population is in itself an interesting part of economics. The census helps us to test and adapt
that theory (0 facts.

- SJrd"r VALLABHBIIAI PATH

No. 51Is9(53-RG
THE REGISTRAR GENERAL, INDIA

New Delhi, the 1st August, 1953

From

Shri R.A. Gopalaswami, I.e.s.,
Registrar General, India ; and
ex-oifi cio Census Commissioner for India

To
The Secretary to the Government of India,
Ministry of Home Affairs,
New Delhi

Sir,
I have t he honour to submit herewith my report on the 1951 Census.

Yours faithfully,

R. A. GOPALASWAMI,
Registrar General, India; and
ex-officio Census Commissioner for India

INTRODUCTION
1. The 1951 Census Reports- The reports on the 1951 Census Ole
issued in 17 volwnes, which are divided into 63 parts. The first of these volumes
contains the All-India Census Report. It is divided into five parts entitled:
PART I -A-REpoRT;

PART I·B-APPENDICES TO THE REpORT;
PART II·A-DEMOGRAPHIC TABLES;
PART II-B-EcONOMIC TABLES (General Population);
PART lI-C-EcONOMIC TABLES (Rural and Urban Population).

The other volumes which are divided into 58 parts, contain the State
Census Reports. These are prepared by my colleagues- the Superintendents
of Census Operations- in different states as shown below· :
Volume

Number

number

(If parts

Shri RAJESHWARI PRASAD, l.A.S.

II

5

Uttar Pradesh

Shri S. VENKATESWARAN, I.C.S.

III

3

Madras and Coorg

Mr. J. B. BOWMAN, I.C.S.

IV

3

Bombay,

V

3

Bihar

VI

6

West Bengal and

Name of Superintendent

Name of
state(s)

rashtra

Sauand

Kutch
Shri RANCHOR PRASAD, I.A.S.
Shri AsOl< MITRA, I.C.S.

•

•

•

•

•

Sikkim
--------

--.,~

• All reports except the following have been or arc being published:
(i) The following parts of reports are in the press:
Report and Subsidiary Tables
BOMBAY
PART I
.
Demographic, Social and Cultural Tables
PART II-A •
Subsidiary Tables
PART I-C.
.
WEST BENGAL
Calcutta Report and Tables
PARTS III and IV •
Subsidiary Tables
PART I-B
Economic, Household & Age (Sample) Table,
PA.RT II-B •
Report
PART I·A,.
RAJASTHAN.
Subsidiary Tables
PART I·B
Report and Subsidiary Table.
PART I
ORISSA
Report
PART I-A
AsSAM
Subsidiary Tables
PART J·B
•
.
PART IT-A and H-B
Tablet
PART I-A,.
• Report
'l'lIAvANCORJI-CocIuN
• Subsidiary Table.
PART I-B
Tablel
PAIlTU

it

Shri J. D. KERAWALLA, I.A.S.
(Died on 7-10-1952)

VII

6

Madhya Pradesh

Shri LAKSHMI CHANDRA VASHISHTHA,
of Punjab Civil Service •

VIII

4

Punjab, PEPSU,
Delhi, Himachal
Pradesh and
Bilaspur

IX

4

Hyderabad

X

5 Rajasthanand

Shri C. K. MURrnY, I.A.S.
Shri YAMUNA LAL DASHORA

Ajmer

Shri M.AHMEn,
of Orissa Civil Service

XI

3

Orissa

Shri R. B. VAGHAIWALLA, I.C.S.

XII

4

Assam, Manipur
and Tripura

Dr. U. S. NAIR

XIII

3

TravancoreCochin

Shri J. B. MALLARADHYA, I.A.S••

XIV

2

Mysore

Shri RANGLAL

XV

4

Madhya

Shri N. K. DUBE
Shri A. K. GHOSH, I.C.S.•

XVI

2-

Vindhya Pradesh

XVII

I

Andaman

Bharat
and Bhopal

and
Nicobar Islands

58

2. District Census Handbooks- In addition to the All-India Census
Report and the State Census Reports, 307 District Census Handbooks have
been compiled by my colleagues. Each handbook relates to one district
Footnou cOl/cll/ded]

II

~1yoORB

PART

MADHYA DHARAT

PART J·B

VII'n!lYA PRADESH

• Tables

•

•

PARTS II-A and II-B

Subsidiary Tables
• Tables

PART I
PART II

• Report and Subsidiary Tables
Tables

(ii) The following parts of reports are under l'lreparatlon or nearina completion:
UTrAR PRADESR •

•

PART I-A

• Report

BIHAR

•

PART I

• Report and Subsidiary Tables

PART I·A

• Report
• Report and Subsidiary Tables

H'iDBRABAD
MVSORB

•

PART I

MADHYA SHARAT.

•

PART I-A

•

• Report

ANDAMAN AND NIOOBAa
ISLANDS

• Report and T.biel

ill
separately and contains all the 1951 Census statistics relating to different local
areas within the district as well as the basic totals of population (by eight separate
livelihood classes) for every village and every ward of every town in the district·
The handbooks (which are issued as State Government publications) also inciud(
other items of information relating to the districts which could be readily
assembled and seemed likely to be useful for purposes of reference. One
hundred and twelve District Census Handbooks have been published already
and the others are in the press.
3. Census of India brochures- It will be noted that the statistical
information contained in the AU-India Census Report is limited to demographic and economic data relating to the country as a whole. Other types of
data are published separately in a series of brochures. These are self-contained
papers, which present the relevant statistics with the minimum of introductory
information required for their proper understanding and use. This series of
brochures also includes a summary of demographic and economic data which it
wa.. found necessary to make available to the publil in advance of the main
report, as we)] as some which are of a spedalised nature.
The following brochures have been published already :
(i) Final Population Totrus;
(it) Population Zones, Natural Regions, Sub-Regions and Divisions;
(iii) Sample Verification of the 1951 Census Count;
(iv) Religion;
(v) Summary of Demographic and Economic Data; and
(v%) Special Groups.
The following brochures are in the press :
(z) Maternity Data;
(it") Languages;
(iii) Displaced Persons;
(iv) Age Tables;
(v) Life Tables;
(vz) Literacy and Educational Standards; and
(vii) Subsidiary Tables.
4. Cost- These are the end-products of the 1951 Census. The total
cost involved cannot be stated exactly until· after next year. But as most of
the expenditure is known, the total can be estimated fairly closely. It is reckoned
that the Central Government will have spent 149lakhs of rupees in all on the 1951

iv
Census. This works out to a sum of Rs. 41/12 per 1,000 persons enumerated.
The corresponding rate for the 1931 Census (the last census for which full
tabulation was undertaken) was Rs. 15/8. The rise in the unit cost is smaller
than the increase which has occurred in the general level of prices, wages
and salaries since 1931.

s.

Preparation- The system of census·taking in India is somewhat
unusual. It used to be likened in the past to the phoenix- the only bird of its
kind which is reputed to complete its life-cyc]e by burning itself on the funeral
pile and then to rise from the ashes with renewed youth to Jive through another
cycle. Mr. M. W. M. YBATI'S described it in somewhat less complimentary
terms as follows :
"The system, if that word can be used here, is in brief that every 10 years
some officer is appointed to conduct a census and officers to work
under him are appointed in each province. The states take corresponding action. These appointments are made at the minimum of
time beforehand and within one year questionnaires have to be
settled, the whole country divided into enumeration units, a
hierarchy of enumeration officers created and trained, millions of
schedules 01 slips printed and distributed over the face of the country,
the whole process of enumeration carried out and checked, tabuJation
then carried out in offices located in any old pJace that can be found,
on make-shift pigeon-hoJes and furnirure and with temporary staffs,
rushed through the presses- and then, in the third year the whole
system is wound up, the officers and the office staffs are dispersed
and India makes haste to discard and forget as soon as possible all
the experience so painfully brought together."
Shortly after the transfer of power, Government decided to put an end to
this reproach. The action taken by Government was described in the following
terms by the late Sardar VALLABHBHAI PATEL, then Home Minister, when he
inaugurated the first Census Conference :
"Ever since I assumed charge of the Home Ministry, I have been taking
some interest in census matters and I was really very happy to have
been instrumental in placing on the Statute Bock a permanent
enactment dealing with the whole operation of Census ........ .
"Hitherto, the Census used to be looked upon as a decennial operation
for which haphazard temporary arrangemems used to be made. I
have already stated that there is now a permanent Census Act on
the Statute Book and Government have already a permanent office
of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner. It is our

v
intention through this unified organisation to effect continuous
improvement over the whole field of population data including the
Census and vital statistics and to conduct experiments in sampling
which would reduce not only the elaboration of these operations
but also the cost."
Mr. YEATIS, who had taken part in the 1931 Census as the Superintendent
of Census Operations in Madras and directed the 1941 Census as Census
Commissioner for India, was appointed Registrar General and ex-officio Census
Commissioner. Thanks to these arrangements, it was possible to begin advance
planning for the 1951 Census somewhat earlier than at former censuses. A
provisional questionnaire was drawn up ; printing of census slips was taken in
hand ; a general outline of the scheme of operations was drawn up ; and the
officers were selected and earmarked for appointment as state census superintendents. Then, Mr. YEATIS fell ill and went on leave. I took charge of the census
preparations in November 1949 as a temporary leave arrangement, in addition
to my other duties in the Ministry of Rome Affairs. Unfortunately, Mr. YEATTS
died in August 1950, when his responsibility devolved on me entirely.
A definite stage in the preparatory period was reached during the last week
of February 1950, when the newly appointed state census superintendents
met in conference. We discussed the work before us in all aspects and achieved
an agreed understanding of our tasks. Final orders of Government were
obtained on the dates to be fixed for the census and on certain issues of policy
affecting the scope of census enquiries. The questionnaire was finalised, as
also a set of model all-India instructions. Detailed local instructions were
prepared by my colleagues in all the local languages. Census charges were
delimited in every district, divided into census circles and sub-divided into
census blocks- the ultimate territorial unit for purposes of census enumeration.
The census workers were selected and allotted to their respective charges, circles
and blocks. They were supplied with forms and stationery, given oral as well
as wrinen instructions, practised and tested. During the first week of February
1951, when the preparatory phase ended, a temporary organisation consisting
of about 7 lakhs of field workers was got ready for action. The exact numbers,
according to reports received, were as follows: 5,93,518 cemus enumerators,
grouped under the supervision and guidance of 80,006 census supervt'sors, themselves directed by 9,854 census charge officers.
6. EnumeratioD- The nature of the work entrusted to the field workers
is clearly described in a message which was sent to them on the eve of

vi
enumeration by Shri C. RAJAGOPALACHARI, then Home Minister of the Government of India :
"Dear colleagues in the Census work! This is the first census held
under orders of the Republic of free India. I am addressing the
enumerators in particular. You have the privilege and honour of
taking a hand in the first census of free India. Ten years hence
the next census will be held. Yours is the earliest privilege. You
are an enumerator and therefore you build the very base of the whole
big structure. The base is, as you know, the most important part
of any structure. The record of your work will remain carefully
kept for use throughout the next ten years.
"Enumeration begins at sunrise on the 9th day of February. From then
upto sunrise on the 1st March you will be visiting all the houses
in your block, locating all the people for whose enumeration you are
responsible ; and ascertaining and recording, in respect of all of
them, the replies which are given to you for the prescribed census
questions. On the 1st, 2nd and 3rd days of March you will re-visit
all the houses for fina] check. You will then make sure that you
have prepared the_record of census enumeration in all respects
as instructed, and hand it over to the supervisor.
"Yours is not an isolated local inquiry. You are one of about six hundred
thousand patriots, all of whom will be engaged on an identical task
at the same time. All of you are jointly responsible for enumerating
all the people. Collectively you will prepare a record of basic
facts relating to the life and livelihood of all the citizens and families
in our Republic.

"If this record is to be correct and complete, the part which you contribute should, in itself, be correct and complete. You should master
the simple instructions which you have received, and apply them
uniformly and conscientiously. These instructions are based on a
common plan for the country as a whole. Like a swarm of bees
that build a beautiful hive according to the laws of geometry, each
doing its part in obedience to a mystic urge, you should do your
part according to conscience and the sense of truth inherent in
us all.
iMPORTANT THINGS TO REMEMBER

"First,- EVERY PERSON SHOULD BE ENUMERATED ONCE, AND NOT MORE
THAN ONCE.

Most people would be enumerated at their usual

vii

place of residence. There are a few who should be enumerated
wherever they are found.
"Secondly,- Do not grudge the time and effort which will be necessary
to get correct and complete answers to the questions relating to
ECONOMIC STATUS AND MEANS OF LIVELIHOOD.

"1 do hope you will take pride over the quality of your contribution to
this nation-wide enterprise and do your best. GOD BLESS YOU I"
During the last 21 days of February 1951, 6lakhs of census workers visited
644 lakhs of occupied houses and made enquiries. The information supplied
to them by about 7 crores of citizens was recorded in 3,569 lakhs of census
slips each of which was a dossier of one person. Then or later the more important items of the information contained in these dossiers were transcribed
in the National Register of Citizens of which one part is allotted to every village
and every ward of every town. The Register shows all the occupied houses
and households arranged in numerical order; and against each household
every line records the information relating to one member of the household.
The census slips and the National Register of Citizens were the record of
basic information collected during the 1951 Census. We ascertained the following particulars in respect of every person who was enumerated:
(i) Name, relationship to head of household, birth-place, sex, age and
marital status ;
(iJ) Household economic status, employment status (if any), principal
means of livelihood and subsidiary means of livelihood (if any); and
(iiI) Nationality, religion, membership of 'special group'· (if any), mother
tongue, bilingualism (if any), literacy and educational standard,
and particulars of displacement (for displaced persons only).
In addition to these items which were common to all parts of India one
other item was prescribed in each state by the State Government concerned.

7. Tabuladon- The second phase of census operations, viz., enumeration
ended with the second visit to all houses carried out during the first three days
of March and the report by the field workers of the number counted by them.
These reports were transmitted from the block, circle and charge, through the
district administrative hierarchy, to state census superintendents and to me,
and the 'Provisional Totals' based on them published during the second fortnight
of ApriJ 1951 for districtS, states and the country as a whole. The third pbase
commenced during April-May 1951) with the opening of 52 temporary tabulation
.This relates to Scheduled Castes. Scheduled TrilJe s, Anglo-Indians and certain classes treated pro.isionally as 'backward' for purpose. of the Census.

viii

offices, sited at convenient centres in all parts of the country ; and the arrival
at these offices of the census slips and National Register of Citizens together
with abstracts and relevant information prepared by local officers.
The manner in which these offices were to be organised, workers recruited
and trained, and the nature of the work to be performed in these offices had been
planned in advance. The main principles were discussed and settled in a
conference held during the last week of December 1950. Very detailed instructions designed to secure rigid uniformity of forms and procedures as well as
safeguards against error had been settled and issued.
There were three stages in the working of these offices. The first was
, sorting and compilation ' at the end of which, the numbers relating to each item
of information were extracted from the census slips by sorters on what are called
, sorter's tickets' and then put together by compilers in 'posting statements' for
the smaller territorial units within each district. This was the most important
stage of tabulation. It was also the most expensive since the tabulation offices
were at maximum strength while it was in progress. According to detailed
information available about all the 52 offices except one (Hyderabad) for which
figures are not available, 47,218 man-months were used up in this process of
sorting and compilation. It took 10'4 sorter-months, 2' 4 compiler-months
and 1'1 supervisor-months to sort and compile the dossiers of one lakh of
people·t
The second stage of tabulation consists in processing the compilers' posting
statements into the main census tables in the form prescribed for all states;
the institution of arithmetical checks and counter-checks for avoidance of error;
and finally their scrutiny and independent check in a central tabulation office
set up within my office. The final tables are then prepared for the press and
go out as separate parts containing purely statistical material with brief introductions and explanations.
The third stage of tabulation consists in the preparation of what are called
'subsidiary tables' and constitutes statistical preparation for the. next pbasefJtz., study and report. The aim at this stage is two-fold. One is to work out
derivative data such as rates and percentages so as to institute comparison between
the 1951 Census data and the corresponding data of previous censuses. The
other is to work out the inter-connections between the census data and other
important data (these are mainly vital statistics and cultivation statistics). Hf.re
tIn other countriel, eleetrically operated machinery is used at this ltage, thus rendering the employment
of alarge staft' unnecenary. A proposal that such machinery _hould be used at this census in oder to carry out
u part of the work was considered carefully and decided againlt, on the ground that it would certainly increase
the cost and, in 1111 probability, take more time. Subsequent experience has not indicated any reason to rell"et
(he decision to rely entirely on human agency.

ix

again, identical forms and instructions were prescribed in advance. A special
difficulty of a fairly formidable character was presented by the fact that the
boWldaries of India as well as of almost all states and a great many districts
had Wldergone very extensive changes after the 15th August, 1947. All the
relevant statistical data of earlier years had to be recomputed for the new territorial
units; and the manner in which this was done had to be clearly explained. The
three stages mentioned above are applicable to the work done in the tabulation
offices controlled by my colleagues. The second and third of these three stages
were reproduced in the central tabulation office, where the all-India tables were
prepared on the basis of state tables which had been checked in this office and
approved for publication.
8. Study and Report- It has been a regular feature of all prtvious
censuses (except that of 1941 when practically all tabulation except the basic
population totals and community totals was dispensed with) that the census
organisation did not content itself with the bare presentation of statistical data.
The data were subjected to careful study and the results of the study were
embodied in narrative reports of quite considerable length. Three blOad
purpo&es were sought to be served by such study :
Firsl,- It was necessary to assess the value, in terms of completeness,
reliability and comparability of the data procured and furnish such
comments and explanations as would be helpful to users of census
statistics. The officers who trained the field staff and scrutinised
the basic record in the various stages of tabulation were in the best
position to do this work;

Secondly,- Much of the material collected at successive censuses is of
an identical nature or at any rate relatable and comparable. A
comparative study, with the help of the subsidiary tables already
mentioned, helped to bring out evidence of changes in various
characteristics which were usually important and significant either
directly as matters of public interest or as the raw material for more
specialised economic and social enquiries which might be Wldertaken
by others ; and

Thirdly,- There are a great many topics of interest relating to the social
and economic life of the people. Where the officers in charge of
census operations were specially interested in any of them, they
were in a position to collect and study the relevant data_along with
the routine study referred to above and the results were set out in
the form of specialised discussion of such topics.

The Census Commissioner and the Superintendents are chosen primarily
with reference to their intimate knowledge of the administrative machinery
whose services are required to be mobilised as well as their capacity for general
management of staff employed on governmental duties, rather than for any
specialised knowledge or aptitude for making statistical computation or for
carrying. out economic and social research. The quality of the result achieved
by their study was, therefore, of a varying nature. Almost all reports were
characterised by their painstaking thoroughness, while the intellectual standard
set by some reports was conspicuously high.
Careful consideration was given, on this occasion, to the question whether
precedent should be followed at all or whether the census organisation might
content itself with bare presentation of statistical material. The conclusion
was reached that it was essential that the first and second of these three purposes
should be secured as satisfactorily as possible within the time, and that the officers
should exercise their discretion in respect of the third. In one respect, however,
a departure from precedent was clearly stipulated from the outset. The 1951
Census was not to concern itself with questions regarding races, castes and
tribes- except in so far as the necessary statistical material relating to 'special
groups' was to be published and certain other material relating to backward
classes collected and made over to the Backward Classes Commission. On the
other hand, it was also enjoined that the maximum possible attention should be
paid to economic data. The instructions which were issued to state census
superintendents about the preparation of state census reports indicated the
general structure required, and concluded with a statement of objective in the
following terms :
"It does not matter if available material does not permit of analysis
sufficiently definite for reaching conclusions.... ..... It does not
also matter if the time available to reporting officers is insufficient
for carrying out even such analysis as may be permitted by the
material. What is essential is that the prescribed subsidiary tables
should be correctly prepared and the reporting officers should apply
their mind to these tables and attempt a review on the lines indicated •

. . ..... . .The reports thus prepared will be of value mainly as the starting
point of more detailed studies (to be undertaken subsequently) of the
inter-relationships of population changes and economic changes in the
country as a whole, as well as in the different states and natural divisions
of the country. If this purpose is served, reporting officers will have
discharged their duty."
All state census superintendents have been proceeding on these lines
generally in preparing their reports. It should be emphasised here that the

xi
views expressed in these reports written by different officers are of a purely
personal nature. They should not be regarded as committing Govemmen t
in any manner to any particular expression of opinion on controversial issues
of any kind.
While the study of census data organised on the lines above described
was proceeding, public interest in the popUlation problem was increasing
rapidly. The Planning Commission took cognisance of the subject and initiated group discussions in which I also took part. The report of the Planning
Commission embodies specific proposals and visualises the collection of
data bearing on the problem, partly as the basis for action by Government and
partly as material for consideration by a Commission, the setting up of which
is mentioned as a possibility.
In these circumstances, I felt that an all-India report on the 1951 Census
would be materially incomplete, if it failed to deal adequately with the population problem of the country. I have accordingly set out a clear and full statement of my own personal appreciation of the problem and what I conceive to be
the correct solution. As explained already the views expressed in the report are
of a purely personal nature and should not be understood to commit Government in
any manner whatsoever.

9. Arrangement of the All-India Report- The AU-India Report,
as already mentioned, is divided into five parts. Three of these parts
(PARTS II-A, II-B and II-C) consist of statistical tables, accompanied by
introductory notes which explain the manner in which the data were secured
and the tables were compiled.
PART I-A is the narrative report proper and PART I-B consists of the
ApPENDICES. The report is divided into five chapters.
The first three
chapters present the picture as observed in 1951.
The first chapter, entitled " The Land and the People-1951" focusses

attention on the area of land per head of population available in the
country as a whole, describes how this varies in different parts of the
country and how this variation is relatable to variations in topography,
soil and rainfall. Mter dividing the country into 5 natural regions and IS
sub-regions in terms of these factors, a description is given of the salient
facts of population and land use in three groups of sub-regions which are distinguished from one another as high, low and medium density sub-regions.
Finally a comparison is instituted, with other countries of the world which
leads to the conclusion not only that there is a very notable shortage of 'land
area per capita' in our COWltry but that the utilisation of usable land within this

xii
limited area has proceeded very far already. A great deal of statistical information- in parts newly ascertained- has been brought together in APPENDIX I
(Population and Land Use) and used as the basis for the account given in the
first chapter.
The second chapter is headed" The Pattern of Living-1951". It begins
with an account of total numbers and numbers in different size-groups of villages
and towns and the distribution of the people among them. Then there is a
description of houses and households- information regarding the relative proportion of households of different size-groups as well as their composition being
a new feature of this census. TIllS is followed by a description of the variations
of the sex ratio in different parts of the country. The age-structure of our
people is then described and compared with that of other countries of the world.
The last two sections of this chapter contain much material which is both new
and important. It is welJ-known that data based on registration of births and
deaths are both incomplete and defective. But a serious and largely successful
attempt was made on this occasion to put them to the fullest use by separating
the grain from the chaff and studying them in combination with census data
and all other data which were capable of throwing some light on the subject.
A systematic study of the whole subject is contained in ApPENDIX II (Note
on Birth Rates and Death Rates). As a result of this study, reasonably firm
conclusions are reached regarding the levels (which prevailed during the decade
ending 1950), of our true birth rates and death rates (as distinguished from
our registered birth rates and death rates). Estimates are furnished not only for
India as a whole, but six broad zones (North India, East India, South India,
West India, Central India and North-West India) ; and they are then
compared with similar rates of other countries. The information presented in
the last section of this chapter entitled 'Maternity Pattern' is even more
important. Thanks to the wise use made by certain State Governments of the
'local option' given to them to put one question of their choice, very valuable
data have been secured about the average number of children born to mothers
of different age-groups. Careful analysis of the data thus secured has yielded,
for the first time, a clear picture of the pattern of maternity in this country
and permits a comparison with the corresponding pattern in other countries.
These statistics have led me to a new form of presentation of the solution'
for the population problem which, I believe, offers definite practical
advantages. These are explained in the last chapter.
The third chapur entitled "Livelihood Pattern-1951" begins with
the 'India Picture'. It contains a complete accounting of how the people
obtain their means of livelihood. The next section explains how the pattern
varies from one zone to another. The last section brings out the main

xiii
features of contrast between the pattern in India and the pattern in Great Britain
and the United States of America. The account given in this chapter is furnished
in as simple terms as possible; but serious students are sure to have very exacting standards of precision in respect of definitions and classifications. In order
to meet their needs, a systematic review of a more formal nature has been prepared
and included in the report as APPENDIX III (Review of Census Economic Data).
In this review a full account is given of the pitfalls to be avoided in instituting
comparison of the data between one part of the country and another for the
same census, and between two different censuses for the same territory, and the
limitations subject to which it is possible to draw significant conclusions.

The fourth chapter is headed " Before and Since 1921". This, like the
three previous chapters, is strictly factual; but it lays the foundation on which
the assessment of the popUlation problem presented in the last chapter is subsequently erected. It is a fundamental conclusion of the study- of which the
results are set out in this report- that 1921 is the 'Great Divide'. Our pattern
of growth subsequent to that year is entirely unlike the pattern of growth before
that year.
The fact that there is a sharp contrast is first established by a
detailed analysis of the relevant figures of all parts of India. Then
the reasons which account for that fact are established by documentary
evidence. The growth of population had been checked by famine and pesti1ence repeatedly before 1921. Except for one tragic exception, population
grew unchecked after 1921. APPENDIX IV (Famine and Pestilence), which
contains relevant extracts from old reports, furnishes in detail the evidence which
is summarised in the first section of this chapter. The next section is devoted
to showing that 1921 is the 'Great Divide' in another resrect- before 1921,
cultivation had more than kept pace with the growth of popUlation; after
1921, cultivation was lagging far behind while the popUlation total was forging
ahead. Developing the conception of 'land area per capita', we have the area
of cultivated land per capita, and based on it, of productivity of cultivation
per capita. This had been stationary or moving up before 1921; after 1921,
it was falling steeply. The value of the material presented in this section
consists in this : great care has been taken to sift available data about cultivation, locate the areas for which statistics of high quality are available on a
comparable basis over a long period and then work out the results for these
areas. The third section sets out the results of the comparative study contained
in APPENDIX III and explains how the livelihood pattern has been changing in
response' to unchecked growth of population and the decline of cultivation per
capila. The economic strength of the average household is seen to have
weakened. The last section of this chapter brings out the final and most
important aspect of the 'Great Divide'. Notwithstanding the famines of the last

xiv
century, India used to be surplus in food. Round about 1921 , India developed
a shortage of foodgrains and this shortage has been growing ever sinceslowly bu t steadily. The relevant statistics have been brought together from
different sources and they bring out unmistakably how the change came about
over a series of years. The change-over is dealt with in different aspects.
First, there are the statistics of imports and exports of grains already referred to.
Then, there are the statistics of grain prices (for which, thanks to the completeness of information available with the Government of Madras, we can form a good
picture for the last 150 years and institute an illuminating comparison with the
trend of grain prices in the United States of America). Finally, there is the
profoWld change in the whole conception of the responsibilities of the State jn
respect of the supply and distribution of grains, the breakdown offree trade, the
Bengal Famine, and the development of 'state trading system' on which crores of
our people depend to-day. The evidence in support of material conclusions in
the analysis made in this section is presented fully in APPENDIX V (Shortage of
Foodgrains).
The last chapter entitled "The Prospect-1981" poses the question
_ what will be the pattern of our growth during the next thirty years? We
know whither the current on which we have been drifting since 192 1 is taking
us. We also know of the great attempts now being made to stop this dangerous
drift and steer the ship of State to safety. How. strong is the current? And
how strong are these attempts? How is a favourable outcome to be assured ?
These questions are discussed at length and firm conclusions reached. Much
of the evidence in support of material conclusions of the analysis in this chapter
is set out in ApPENDIX VI (Old Irrigation Project8 and Irrigation Development
Projects) and APPENDIX VII (Maternity Data and Birth Control). It is fully
realised and made clear at every stage of the discussion that the nature of the
material is such that widely varying views can be and are being held both in
respect of the facts themselves and the appreciation of the significance of the facts.
As the Royal Commission in the United Kingdom observed "parts of the
subject may be likened to that fabled morass where armies whole have sunk ".
The various views held ·on the subject are set out and reasons given for reaching
a particular conclusion. The busy reader may, at this stage, turn over to the
last section of the last chapter and read the conclusion straightaway.
10. Acknowledgements- Though

the CONSTITUTION lays the duty
of census-taking exclusively on the Central Government the census is carried
out for the benefit of the entire State which, according to the CONSTITUTION
"includes the Government. and Parliament of India and the Government
and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities

xv

within the territory of India or under the control of the Government f
'" I t gIves
.
Ind18.
me. great pI~asure to report that this was fully realised0 ;
and the census receIved unstlnted support and ready assistance from the
Governments of all states as well as all other authorities.

~ census, like its predecessors, was made possible by the efforts of
about SIX lakhs of public-spi~~ed census workers who made the enquiries
and the seven crores or so of CItIzens who gave them the information asked
for. ~e fact. that this is the first census of free India was appreciated by
all and It contributed greatly to the success of th0 undertaking. The press
throughout the country, as I have gratefully acknowledged once before, was
consistently helpful and gave effective publicity and support to the census at
all important stages.
The results of the labours of my colleagues will be before the public.
Where al1 have given of their best, it would be invidious to name anyone for
special mention. I should, however~ place on record my tribute of admiration for Shri J. D. KERAWALLA whose enthusiasm for the work was
infectious and whose untiring exertions may have contributed to the malady
of which he died before his report could be published.
A number of officers helped me to direct the census and write this
report. Shri D. NATARAJAN who was on Mr. YEATTS' staff both in 1931
and 1941 has not only contributed his personal knowledge of prior censuses but
also borne a heavy burden of administrative responsibility as Assistant Census
Commissioner. Without his help I could not have held charge of two distinct
offices. I have also benefitted by Shri NATARAJAN'S advice and suggestions
in drafting my report.
Shri P. N. KAUL had no previous experience of
government offices When he was called upon to fWlction as the statistical
conscience-keeper not only for me but all the state census superintendents. He
did this to the satisfaction of all of us. He organised the central tabulation
office, trained and led a temporary staff which constructed all the all-India
tables and checked a11 the state census tables. Shri T. V. RANGARAJAN and
Shri SHANKAR KApOOR rendered notable assistance, in the collection and analysis
of material for my use, as well as in checking the drafts and preparing them for
the press.
All the members of this able team, and the other members of the
staff have worked long hours over a long period ungrudgingly and have still got
much to do in seeing all this material through the press. This report is as much
theirs as mine and I am very grateful to them.
I have drawn freely on the resources of other Ministries and Departments
who have ungrudgingly offered all facilities: The Ministry of Labour spared
the services of Shri S. P. JAIN who prepared the Age Tables and Life Tables,

xvi

and whose initial study of the statistics of registration of births and deaths in
combination with census data was the starting point of the systematic analysis
of demographic data furnished in this report. The Planning Commission spared
the services of Dr. V. NATH who helped me to formulate the scheme of natural
regions and sub-regions and to build up parts of the statistical material presented
in APPENDICES I and VI, including in particular, the data re.lating to 'decline
of cultivation per capita'. I valued his advice and suggestions based on his study
of conditions in foreign countries as well as his knowledge of discussion and
study within the Planning Commission. The Adviser of the Planning
Commission on Health Programmes, Dr. T. LAKSHMINARAYANA spared time
for many discussions which clarified the issues relating to birth control.
His experienced judgment gave me confidence in putting forward definitive
conclusions in a highly controversial field.
Much material was specially compiled for me by the Surveyor General of
India; the Director Gencr~l of Observatories, Meteorological Department ;
the Director of Geological Survey of India; the Inspector-General of Forests;
the Economic and StatistIcal Adviser, Ministry of Food and Agriculture; the
Statistical Adviser, Indian Council of Agricu1tural Research; and the Head of
the Division of Chemistry, Indian Agricultural Research Institute.
The Directorate General of Health Services spared the services of Shri
KHUSHI RAM, who prepared most of the maps and all the diagrams in this
report.
Publicity arrangements for the census were in the hands of Shri
V. KRISHNASWAMI of the Press Infonnation Bureau, who took keen personal
interest for which I am grateful.
In tliese days the pressure on the Government Press is extremely heavy and
Shri C. A. SUBRAHMANYAM, Controller of Printing & Stationery, India bas a very
difficult task to perform. But the Censu<.; of India is an old customer and there
has never been any doubt about the anxiety of all concerned in the Government
Press to do their best to ensure that census printing is attended to efficiently and
speedily. I have every confidence that the work that still remains to be done
will be done well.

NEW DELHI:

1st August, 1953

R. A. GOPALASWAMI,
Registrar General, India; and
ex-officio Census Conunjssioner for India.

Ta hi e

of

Contents

PART I-A-RBPORl
i --xvi

INTRODUCTION

xvii -xxxi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Chapter I:

The Land and the People-I9SI

"WE, TUM PnOPLJ! OF INDIA"

A -

LAND AREA PER CAPITA

1
2 ~5

The area of bnd and the nllmber of the pc'oplc - Degree of
accuracy (If the data ~ Sample verification of the 195 r CenslIs COUllt anJ
the margin of error - Territory covered - Land area per capita - Distribution of population and land area into zones and states - Unequal distribution of thc people on land.

B --:' ToPOGRAPlIY, SOIL AND RAINFALL

6-12

Classification of land area into mountains, hills, plateaus and plains;
and their distribution among the various zones - Topographically usable
land; exclusion of sandy waste and marshy/watcry areas - Topographically
usable area in India and the six zones - Types of soils - Rainfall and its distribution - The five rainfall belts: the blue, dark green, light green, brown
and yellow belts - Special hazards of areas in brown and yellow beltsThe S natural regions, IS sub-regions and 52 divisions.

C-

HIGH DENSITY SUB-Rl!GIONS

The Lower Gangetic Plains, the Upper Gangetic Plains, MalabarKonkan, South Madras and North Madras & Orissa Coastal sub-regions Population, density and land area per capita - Conditions of topography,
soil, rainfall and mineral resources In each of the five SUb-regions High density of settlement and smaller land area per capita - Comparison with India as a wh91e - DistributiorJ of lapa among different rainfall

12-20

belts snore favourable - Smallness of brown belt and absence of yellow
belt - Net area sown and land use figures - Fertile alluvial soil, higher
productivity and smaller proportion of fallow land - Comparison of indices
of land use with those of India as a whole.
D -

Low DENSITY SUB-REGIONS.
The Desert, Western Himalayan, Eastern Himalayan, North-West
Hills, North Central Hills & Plateau and North-East Plateau sub-regionsPopulation, density and land area per capita - Conditions of topography
soil, rainfall and mineral resources in each of the six sub-regions - Comparison with India as a whole - Low density of settlement and larger land area
per capita - Lower proportion of topographically usable land - Better
rainfall - Net area sown and land use figures - Low proportion of net
area sown to topographical1y usable area and high ratio of unused land
- Comparison of indices of land use with those of India as a whole
- Probable existence of reserves of cultivable but uncultivated land Existence of mineral resources of distinctly higher range and value in
two of the sub-regions and the possibility of their influencing the relative distribution of people on the land in future.

E-

MEDIUM DENSITY SUB-REGIONS

The Trans-Gangetic Plains, South Deccan, North Deccan and
Gujrat-Kathiwar sub-regions - Population, density and land area per capila
- Conditions of topography, soil, rainfall and mineral resources in each of
the four sub-regions - Comparison with India as a whole - Better topographical components, poorer soil and unfavourable rainfall- Predominance
of the brown belt and hazards due to capriciousness of rainfall and difficulties'of cultivation - Net area sown and land use figures - Pressure of
population on land.
F - INDIA AND TIll! WORLD.

Comparison of population, land area, agricultural area and arable land
of India and the World - High level of utilization ofland in India -Conditions of topography in India and the World - The smaller proportion of
arid or frozen land in India - Land in Europe better fitted for cultivation
- Comparison with Europe (excluding U. S. S. R) - Surprising
nature of result - Confirmation of result by separate comparison of high
density and low density sub-regions with corresponding groups of
countries in Europe - Comparison with U. S. A. and U. S. S. R - More
favourable relationship between land and the people in U. S. 1\. and
'(1. S. S, R. than in India or Europe.

xix
Chapter U: The Pattern of Uving-I951

A-

VILLAGES AND TOWNS

•

•

•

•

41-47

Number and population of villages and towns - The 'village
groups' -:Components of'an average 'village group' - Differences in size of
villages in different zones - More large villages in South India and
West India - Differences due to different definitions of a village - Distribution of small, medium, large and very large villages among ZonesMedium-sized village, the dominant type. Percentage of urban population in India - Highest proportion in West India - The order among
other zones - Differences in urban ratio in states within each zone and
divisions within each state - Cities, major towns, minor towns and townships - Distinction between towns and villages - Percentage of urban
population in townships and minor towns in various zones - Cities and
major towns - 'Town groups' - The ten largest cities of India (on 'town
groups' basis).

B-

HOUSES AND HOUSBHOLDS

Number of occupied houses in villages and towns - Number
of persons per occupied house in villages and towns - Definition
of 'house' and 'household' - Household data compiled for sample
households from the National Register of Citizens - Number of
households in 100 hOUseS - Number of persons in 100 householdsNumber of persons in 100 houses - Sex ratio in household., - Small,
medium, large and very large households in villages and townsPreponderance of medium households - Larger proportion of small
households as compared to large and very large household., - Pattern of
household relationships - Excess of males over females in households,
both in villages and towns - Size and pattern of rural and urban house.
holds in each zone - Heads of households and their wives - Sons and
daughters of heads:of households - Other persons related and unrelated
to heads of households.

c- SEX RATIO
Number of females per thousand males for India and the zones Low sex ratio in North India and North-West India - Sex ratio
in certain natural divisions - The lower sex ratio in towns - Rural and
Urban sex ratio in various zones. Accuracy of the figures - Considerations pointing to possible inaccuracies - Mr. GAIT'S refutation - The
consistency of the pattern at successive censuses - Doubts
removed by the results of Sample Verification of the 1951 Census
oount. The sex ratio in the World - Excess offeroales in most countde$

47-54

in Europe - Excess of males (of European descent) in U.S.A., Canada,
Australia, New Zealand and Africa. Sex ratio and migratory movements - Unequal sex ratio at birth and difference in the incidence of
death on the two sexes - Registration data (1941-5°) relating to sex
ratio at birth and of infants who die within one year of birth for Madras,
Madhya Pradesh, Bombay and Uttar Pradesh - Comparison of the
registration data and the 1951 Census data relating to Sex ratio of
infants in these states - Difference in mortality of males and females
at different ages as well as incidence of mortality due to famine and
pestilence.
D-

AGE STRUCTURE •

Recording of age at censuses - Definitions - Errors in returns due
to ignorance about age - Digital preferences - Instructions to enumerators to make the best possible estimate of age - Us(.~ of calendars of important events - Completeness of age returns - 'Smoothed' Age Tables Life Tables - 'Unsmoothed' figures for individual ages and for broad agegroups. Age pyramids for India and U. S. A. - Juvenile proportions for
the six zones of India, Japan and certain European countries - Proportion of infants - Order of infant proportion in zones not necessarily
Children of displaced
indicative of the order of birth rate persons - Proportion of infunts, young children, and boys & girlsComparison with other countries having low juvenile proportiom and
high juvenile proportions - Proportion of elderly persons and comparison
with other countries - Age pyramids for villages and towns - Diminution
in the juvenile proportion in towns - Age pyramids for Greater Bombay
and Calcutta.

B-

MARITAL STAros PATI'ERN

Proportion of unmarried persons, males and females - Child marriages - Proportion of unmarried males and females aged 15 and over Comparison with other countries - Proportion of unmarried women in
successive age-groups - Proportion of marned males and widowers
and married females and widows - Inequality of sexes - General
equality of numbers of married males and married females in the country
- Proportion of married males and married females to total population
in the zones - Possible explanation of differences between zones
- Comparison of proportion of widows and widowers in 1931 and
1951 - Significance of the drop in the proportion of widows.

P-

BIRTH RATES AND DEATII RATES

Relationship between births and deaths and the changing pattern
of life - Official re~istration of births BP9 deaths and publication of birth

rates and death rates - Comparison of census data and registration datil in
Uttar Pradesh - Incompleteness of registration data - Registration data
of other states - Estimate of the actual number of births, deaths and net
balance of migraticn from the observed growth of population - Detailed
discussions on birth rates and death rates. in ApPENDIX II -Estimated.
birth rates and death rates for India and zones - C{lmparis(lQ of estimated rates with those of U. K. and U. S. A.
G -

MATERNITY PATIHRN

•

Nature of maternity data - Local census question used in some
states to collect maternity data -- Experimental Census of Births und
Deaths - Review of maternity data collected in Travul1core-CochinChild birth index, child survival index and child Joss index of (."(1mplctcd
maternity experience and incomplete maternity experience - Relation
between tempo of child-bearing and the age of mother- Mid-maternal age
- Child birth indices by livelihood groups of mothers, rural and ul'ban Maternity types differentiated by age of commencement of child-bearing
- Diminution of child birth index attributable to postponement of commencement of child-bearing - Child binh inuices of widowed mothers Companson between Travaneorc-Cochin and Madhya Pradesh in respect of
completed maternity experience of still married mothers aged 45 and over Complrative study of other maternity data of Travancorc-Cochin and
Madhya Pradesh - Maternity data relating to villages in Wcst BcngulComparison of the maternity data ofIndia and U. K. - Proportion of first
order births, sCt.'Ond order births, third order births and births of fourth
and higher order and the estimated number of births of cae}: orderThe concept of improvident maternity - Incidence of improvident maternity.

Chapter m: LiveUhood Pattern-1951
A-

INDIA PICTIJRB

Means of living and means of livelihood - The Census question
regarding means of livelihood - The economic table... of the 1951
Census - Detailed review of data, in APPBNDIX III. Proportion of
non-earning dependants - Higher proportion of non-earning dependants
among females. Earning dependants - The definition - Number and
proportion - Relatively small proportion in t'nVflS and high proportion
among rural females. Se1f-supponing persons - The definition - Number and proportion - Low proportion of women. Cla-;sification of selfsupporting persons into agriculturists and non-agriculturists - Number

81-88

and proportion of agriculturists and non-agriculturis~ - Self-su'pp~rting
persons among agriculturists in each of the four agrJ~tural hve1~ood
classes - Numerical insignificance of agricultural rentiers (Uvelihood
<Jass IV) - Types of people included in Livelihood Class IV Cultivators and cultivating labourers - Distinction between ownercultivators and tenant-cultivators - Preponderance of owner-cultivators.
Distribution of non-agriculturists into (I) employers, self-employed
persons and employees; and (2) non-agricultural rentiers, pensioners and
miscellaneous income receivers - Proportion of all self-supporting nonagriculturists to all self-supporting persons - Low ratio of employers Large number of self-employed persons - Proportion of earners of 'net
profits' higher than that of eamers of 'wages and salaries'. The 10
divisions of industries and services and 88 sub-divisions - Number
engaged in each of the ten divisions - Activities included in the ten
divisions and their relative importance - Affiliation of dependants to selfsupporting persons by means of livelihood - Number supported by each
of the eight livelihood classes - Relation between the non-agricultural
Livelihood Classes V to VIn and the ten divisions of industries and
services - Number of dependants supported by ~elf-supporting persons.

B-

ZONAL VARIATIONS

JID--IJ8

Proportion of self-supporting persons, earning dependants and nonearning dependants to general population in each zone - Differences between zones not due to differences in age structure - Smaller proportion of
village women doing field work in East India and South India - Contrast in
Central India and West India - Availability of gainful employment in
different zones - Bread-winners - Male bread-winner proportions in
villages and towns - Dependence on agriculture in different zonesNumerical insignificance of agricultural rcntiors and their dependantsProportion of cultivating labourers and their dependants - Proporticn of
tentant-cultivators and their dependants - Proportion of owner-cultivators and their dependants - Relative proportion of cultivators to
cultivating labourers - Natural di\'isions with high and low ratio of
cultivators to cultivating labourers - Natural divisions with high and low
proportion of owner-cultivators to tenant-cultivators - Agicultural
landholders and landless agriculturists - Figures how compiledProportion of landless agriculturists to agricultural landholders.
C-

CoMPARISON WITH U. S. A., AND GREAT BRITAIN

Difficulties in comparison of economic data of different countries Comrarison of burden of dependency between India, U. S. A. and Great
Britain - Larger burden of dependency in India - Gainfully employed
persons in India, U. S. A, and Great Britain by sectors of productive

118-120

xxiii
activity - The low figures of man-power devoted to food production in

V. S. A., and Great Britain - Differences in numbers engaged in mining,
manufacture and commerce - The significance of differences.

Chapter IV:
A-

Before and Since 19%1

GROWTH OF POPULATION: CHECKED AND UNCHBCKED

The changing picture - Changes during the three decades before
and since 1921 - The profound difference in the pattern of growth
before Bnd since 1921 - Growth in the present territory of India since
1 891 Increase in numbers upto and sin'Ce 1921 - Are the figures
true ? - The reasons for doubt - Genuineness of striking contrast between the two 1hirty-year periods - Analysis of the changes during the
three decades before 1921 - Part played by famine and pestilence1921, the turning point - Natural checks to growth of population before
1921 - Famines (including famine diseases), epidemic diseases and endemic
diseases - Growing effectiveness of counter-checks since 1921 - The
Bengal Famine of 1943 - Extracts from reporls on famines and pestilence, in ApPENDIX IV - New phase in the effort to combat famine.
Comparison of the rates of popUlation growth in India with those
of other countries - Population of the World 200 years ago Increase by 1800 - Growth of the New World - PopUlation about
J 850 - Acceleration in growth Population about 1900 - Change in
distribution of !the world~population between 1750 and 1900. Fall in the
population of western European countries - Better nutritional standards Fall in death rates - Practice of contraception during last fifty years.
World population figures in 1950 - The theory that fall in birth rate was a
biological phenomenon - U. K. Royal Commission's findings about cause
of fall in birth rates. The trebling of mankind in the last two centuriesPre~ent rate of growth not a normal characteristic of an indefinite past Will this growth continue indefinitely in future ?

B-

DECLINE OF CULTIVATION

PER CAPITA

•

Growth of population during the last 60 years in relation to the
growth of cultivation - Extent to which the growth of cultivation lags behind
- Difficulties in quan titative assessment - Reliability of c~tivation statistics - Data on population and land use, in APPENDIX I - Statistics of
cultivated acreages in India more reliable than statistics of yields of crops
- Area of cultivated land per capita - Study of selected districts having
reliable data over 60 years - Small but u,unistakable decline in the area

121-138

of cultivated land per capita. Intensification of cultivation Nl'nl' extension - Relation between a drop in the area cultivated par capita and a drop
in the productivity of cultivation - Methods of increasing yield:
more double-cropping, mOre irrigation, better fertilization and better
culture - Lack of quantitative data regarding the latter two - Increase in
double-crop area per capita nowhere near the rate of growth of population;
same with irrigated area per capita - Conclusions based on ftudy of
selected districts supported by figures for other areas.

C-

CHANGE IN THE LIVELIHOOD PATl"HRN

Effect of rapid and uninterrupted growth of population since 1921
and decline in cultivation per capita on the livelihood pattern - New
developments during the last 30 years: Development of manufactUring
industries and transport - New towns -- Other developments - the
quickening tempo of these changes during the last decade. Has the
development of industries and services been sufficient to offset the
decline in cultivation per capita ? - Lack of data relating to industries
and services - Rate of growth in villages since 1921 slower than in towns
- Larger growth in cities and major towns - Growth of rural population
outstrips growth of cultivation - Definite decline in the area of cultivated
land per capita -- Absence of corresponding decline in the relative weight
of dependence on agriculture - Increase of non-eaming dependants rough
index of growth of unemployment -Increase in cultivators and cultivting
labourers on the same area of cultivated land index of increased underemployment - Changes in the proportion of cultivating labourers to all
workers on land and probable explanation.
D-

GROWTH OF FOOD SHORTAGE •

Food controls-Development of a system of state trading in foodgrains - Gigantic scale (If operation of the system - Significance of the
emergence of the system in relation to the growth of population and
cultivation before and since 1921 - Evolution of 'free trade' - Maintenance of free trade in foodgrains during famines - Recommendations
of the Famine Commission of 1880 - Adherence to the policy of
non-interference with trade during the economic depression of 1930'SBreakdown of free trade and the Bengal Famine - Continuance of state
trading and food controh after the War - Nostalgia for return of free
trade - Dc-control in 1947 and Re-control- Planning Commission's
wa rning against lifting of controls A big question mark over the
future. Historical review of trend of foodgrain supply in India, Pakistan
and Burma - The grains surplus in 1880 - Net exports from undividsd
India for the five-year periods 1890-91 to 1894-9S and 1905-06 to
I~IO - Net exports out of Burma during the same period - Rising

tempo of exportS of foodgrains from Burma - Combined India-PakistanBurma trading unit had large exportable surplus - Undivided India
still a net exporter in 1920 - End of self-sufficiency and change-over
from net exports to net imports round about 1921. Changes during
and since World War II - Average level of foodgrain imports for
1947-52 - Steady increase of nCl imports not explainable by shift in cultivation away from foodgrains. Historical review of trend of foodgrain
prices - Trend of prices of South Indian paddy over ISO yearsComparison with the course of wheat prices in U. S. A. - Impracticability of direct determination of quantum of shortage of foodgrains
as the difference between production and consumption - Detailed
study of available data, in APPENDIX V. Correlation of increase of
foodgrain imports with decline of cultivation per capita - Surprising
that the imports were not larger than they actually were - Possible
explanations.

Chapter V: The Prospect-I98I

A-

FUTURE GROWTH OF POPULATION

Examination of population trend in Great Britain by the Royal Commission - Insufficiency of existing data - Considerations involved in the
attempt to peer into the future - l'orecast of popUlation of Great Britain for
1962,1977,2007 and 2047, on three different assumptions based on future
'family size' - Nature ofthe assumptions. Forecast of future popUlation
in India - Data much more meagre - Lower and upper limit estimates
for 1961, 1971 ~and 1981 based on growth during last three decades - Alternative line of approach based on age-sex proportions in last three censuses
- Forecast for the three states, Uttar Pradesh, Madras and Madhya
Pradesh and deduced forecast for India. Review of birth/death data since
1921, with a view to ascertain trends relevant to forecast - Registration
data for last three decades - Mean decennial birth rates and death rates Estimates of under registration in 1941-50 based on computed rates - Fall
in actual births and deaths registered during 1931-40 and 1941-50 - Comparison of registration rates with census growth rate - Likely deterioration
in registration - Comparison of registration data of 1921-30 and 1931-40
- Possibility of g e n u inc fall in actual death rate - Comparison of
registered rates during 1931-40 and 1941-50 - Greater fall in registered
birth rate - Differences in trend of death rates and birth rates in Punjab,
Madras, Bombay and Madhya Pradesh - Definite fall in death rate and
the microscopic fall in birth rate - Evidence of Life Tables - Significant
increase in expectation of life - Expectation of life in India compared to
England and Wales, Australia, New Zealand, U.S.A., Japan and Egypt-

177-1 91

Continuing high level of infant and child mortality - Net diminution
of birth rate during 1941-50 compared with 1921-30 - Two likely
causes: (I) Relative proportion of married females in age groups 15-24,
25-34, 35-44 - Figures for Uttar Pradesh, Madras, Bombayand Madhya
Pradesh - Analysis of Madhya Pradesh figures - Change due to
distortions caused by selective mortality; and (2) Rise in age of
marriage - Inferences about future maternity and mortality. - Conditions
affecting t.he validity of forecasts for uninterrupted growth of population
up to 1981. Significance for the future of the decline of cultivation
per capita and growth of food shortage since 1921 Three possibilities
for 1981 : catastrophe, the 'near miracle' and the third alternative of keeping
pace with the uninterrupted growth of population.
B -

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY : DEVELOPMENT TARGETS

Differences between 'p rod u c t i v i t y' and ' pro due t ion '
in the context of agricultural development - Single yardstick for
measurement of productivity - Present level of productivity in
India - Estimated shortage of food grains - Targets of development
for Ig6I, 1971 and 1981 - Targets arc minimal estimates of the scale and
tempo of development required - Role of Governments - The First
Five Year Plan - Schemes for development of irrigation - Unprecedented
scale of the undertaking - Present high proportion of irrigated land in
the country - Comparison with other countries - Proportion of irrigated
area in various zones - Development of irrigation during last century by
public and private enterprises - Additions to irrigation due to Public
Works Projects constructed during 1891-1920 and 1921-40 - Diminishing
tempo of construction and inequalities of development in different zonesHistory of irrigation development in U. S. A. - Comparison with IndiaIrrigated area under old projects and Plan projects in different ZonesReason for confidence That planned extension of major irrigation will
be achieved - Analysis of costs and results, in ApPENDIX VI - Main
conclusions - Probable increase in productivity from Plan projects on
completion - Planned target likely to be achieved before 1961 - Contribution of major irrigation projects will be about one-fourth of the overall
development required by 1961. Minor irrigation schemes - Anticipated
increase in irrigation area by zones - Difficulties in assessing results of
minor irrigation programmes - Need for careful adjustment of subsidies
to cultivators - Anticipated productivty - Uncertainty of time and cost
involved - Combined increase in productivity compared with need in Ig6I
- Other means of increasing yield : Improvement in frrtilisation and
cultural practice~, reclamation of waste land and use of tractors. Present
level of gross area sown - Anticipated limit for 1981 - Resultant increase
in productivity - Present level of irrigated area - Anticipated increase
by 1981 - Resultant increase in productivity - Other means of increasing

192-20

productivity - Resultant increase. Total increase in output just sufficient
for 45 crores, the likely population about 1969 - Effort to 'keep pace' with
uninterrupted growth upto 1981 wilikely to succeed.
C-IMPROVIDENT MATERNITY: REDUCTION TARGET

Implications of continuing food shortage and unchecked growth of
population - Steadily increasing need for importation of foodgrains The measure of increase in import norm with reference to population growth
- Bare minimum of development of production necessary to stabilise the
import norm - Comparison with other countries depending on imported
food supplies - Future possibilities of food supplies from foreign countries
- Two main conclusions: (I) We cannot grow enough food at present rate of
increase; and (2) if we cannot grow more we must eat less. Nood to realise
that it is improvident to increase in numbers indefinitely - Is substantial
reduction in rate of growth possible?- Varying views in different countries
on the popUlation problem - Crystallisation of public opinion in recent
years-The Planning Commission's views - Acceptance of need for governmental action - Need for considering targets and priorities - Need for
achieving a substantially stationary popUlation before our number exceeds
45 crores - Improvident maternity - Incidence of improvident maternity
- Elimination or drastic reduction neCC'isary for stabilising popUlation
- Present level of incidence of improvident maternity - The reduction
target for 15 years - Avoidance of improvident maternity the national need
- Method of approach - The organisation necessary - Development of
maternity and child welfare centres as agencies for rendering help to mothers
hefore, during and after child-birth - The personnel necessary - The role
of 'dais' - The need for co-operation from public-spirited social workers
- Central Research and Information Unit; tasks to be completed within
specified I imc -- Nationwide campaign of publicity for elimination of improvident maternity necessary - Review of progress every year - Estimate
of per head cost for scheme, in ApPENDIX VII. Attainment of the target
for reduction of improvident maternity feasible - Together with the
indicated targets of development of agricullUral productivity it will provide
permanent solution of the population problem.
D - CONCLUSION

•

NATURAL REGIONS, SUB-REGIONS AND DIVISION"
POPULATION ZONES, STATES, NATURAL DIVISIONS .ANI) DI:;TRICrs

226--228

•

23 1
23 2- 2 34

MAPS AND DIAGRAMs
'PAGt!
I.

Distribution of Population by districts -

1951 Census

Frontispiece

(MAP IN-COLOUR)
2.

Natural Regions and Sub-Regions (MAP).

3.

Rainfall Belts in India (MAP -

IN COLOUR)

4. Geology and Mineral Resources (MAP 5. Population and Land Use -

IN COLOUR).

1951 (MAP -

IN COLOUR)

6.

Age Pyramids -

India and U. S. A ..

7.

Age Pyramids -

India, Rural and Urban

8.

Age Pyramids -

Greater Bombay and Calcutta

9.

Distribution by Civil Condition (Marital
persons in India and Zones (IN COLOUR)

10.

II.

Birth Rates and Death Rates U. S. A.

I

"

1

.'
"
"

I
I

"
"

Status) of 10,000

70

India and Zones, U. K. and

Logistic Graduation of Maternity data -

Prccedinf! 81
Maternity Type A

(IN COLOUR)
12.

Preceding

Logistic Graduation of Maternity data -

"
Maternity Type B

(IN COLOUR)

13. Number of First births, Second births, Third births. Fourth
and higher order births
14.

15.

16.

Preceding 89

Distribution of 10,000 persons of Agricultural Classes by Sex and
Household Economic Status.

89

Distribution of 10,000 persons of Non-agricultural Classes by
Sex and Household Eeconomic Status

Distribution of 10,000 persons by Livelihood Classes - India and
Zones - Rural Population

19. Distribution of 10,000 persons by Livelihood Classes - India and
Zones - Urban Population
20.

88

Distribution of 10,000 persons by Sex and Household Economic
Status

17. Distribution of 10,000 persons by Livelihood Classes - India and
Zones - General Population
18.

Facing

Distribution of 10,000 Self-supporting Persons in non-agricultural population by Employers, Employees Independent
Workers (Self-employed Persons) and persons not economically
active.

.
"

"
"

"

89

xxix
Distribution of 10,000 Self-supporting Persons of Non-agricultural Classes in Industries and Services by 10 divisions
of Industries and Services - India, North India, Central India
and North-West India
22. Distribution of 10,000 Self-supporting Persons of Non-agricultural Classes in Industries and Services by 10 divisions of
Industries and Services - India, East India, South India and
West India
23. Active Workers and Dependants - India, Great Britain and
V. S. A..
24. Mean Annual Rate of Growth of Population (1891-1900)
(MAP)

Preceding 121

Mean Annual Rate of Growth of Population (1901-1910)
(MAP)

121

21.

25.
26.

Mean

Annual Rate of Growth of Population

Mean Annual Rate of Growth of Population

(1891-1920)

(MAP)
28.
29.

Mean Annual Rate of Growth of Population
(MAP)

(1921-]93°)

Mean

(1931-194°)

Annual Rate of Growth of Population

"
Facing

"

Mean

U1

.,

121
121

Annual Rate of Growth of Population

(1941-195°)

(MAP)

31.

Mean Annual Rate of Growth of Population
(MAP)

(1921-195°)

32.

Mean Decennial Growth Rates for six decades 1891-1901
1941-1951 (by Sub-Regions) - (MAP)
33. Additions to Population during 30 years before and since 19~1
34. Droughts and Floods before and since 1921

35. Trends in cultivation per capita
1891-1951.

(MAP -

in 13

selected

South

Indian

Paddy

Prices -

Trend

over

ISO

(IN COLOUR)

38.

Development of Irrigation :
Major Irri~tiOfl Projects -

"

.'

.

I21

121

121

121

.

133

Facing

140

"

divisions

IN COLOUR)

36. Exports and Imports of Foodgrains in India (1890-91 to 1952)
37.

121

"

(MAP)
30.

JI8

(1911-1920)

(MAP)
27.

Preceding 89

"

years
t,

Trend of Financial Returns

166
170

Preceding 198

PART J-B -

ApPENDICES TO TIm RBpORT

(Printed separately)

APPENDIX I - POPULATION AND LAND USE
In troduaory Note
Table Series :
1 - Population and land use in India
2 - Yield rates of principal crops in India
3 - Population an d land use - India and the World
4 - Population and land use - Great Britain
5 - Population and land use - United States of America
6 - Population and land use - Union of Socialist Soviet Republics
APPENDIX II - NOTE ON BIRTH RATES AND DEATH RATES
Note on birth rates and death rates
Annexure I - Mean decennial growth rate
Annexure II - Computed Birth and Death Rates in India during
1941-50 (by Shri S. P. JAIN)
Annexure III - Logistic Graduation of Maternity data: and derivation of table of Age Specific Maternity Rates
APPENDIX III - REvIEW OF CENSUS ECONOMIC DATA
Part A - Census questions, definitions and classifications
Part B - Review of data relating to household economic status
Part C - Review of data relating to agriculturists
Part D - Note on data relating to cotton textiles
APPENDIX IV - FAMINE AND PEsTILENCE
Part A - List of famines and scarcities
Part B - Old famines
Part C - Plague, cholera and small-pox
Part D - Malaria, kala-azar and fevers
Part E - The Great Influenza Pandemic
Part P - 'The Bengal Famine, 1943
APPENDIX V - SHORTAGE OF FOODGRAINS
Part A - Note on production, consumption and shortage of foodgrains
in India - 1951
Part B - Supply and prices of foodgrains
Part C - Estimates of rates of consumption of foodgrains
Part D - Import and export of foodgrains in relation to India's foreign
trade
Part B - Distribution of foodgrains - Government responsibility

APPENDIX VI - OLD IRRJGATON PROJE~S AND IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT
PROJEcrs
Part A -

Irrigation Development Statistics

Part B -

Note on analysis of cost of results of major irrigation
projects

APPENDI}I. VIl Part A -

MATERNITY DATA AND BIRTH CONTROl.

Maternity Statistics

Part B - Estimate of cost of Maternity and Child Wclfar<: Services
Part C - Extracts from the Report of the U. K. Royal Commission
on Population, 1949 ; and Statistical data

Natural Regions and Sub-Regions

.

,,'

,,'

'

?t'

.'
_.

IN 0 I A
n'

,.'

,,'

,.'

I.' lun D lllIlUYAJI Pf-I:UIOI

I.a U.sTtIl il .... UT.. a:t-tU I(\II

NOtITHUN ~L" I N' ReCION
l.1 L.u ".lIC t'UIIS S.f-Rlt l"
2.2 ,"",U URn IC 'LA I. S ft....UIOI
2.J lUIl-GOUT IC: 'LAI A! $\II .. UGH,.
1.16 r.: f!(S(ll sn... t lIOi

1.1 IOITI·iI(1T I u.s sut-u"'"
3.2 _tl c.tITUL 'ItlLLS U' "'UUII S" ....E"OII
1.1 1OAl""'UST PLinAII S""'UCiIQJ
J . • QlTIi D[(C.Y SW-UIUOI
5.~SOl#nM~S"".[" C I

--~

_-

.'

--

.,::.....

t -

...

_:L __ _'"---=--

,..

"

..

'

....

...

go'

Rainfall

Belts

.! :
4

..
4

o

~

en

t-

.J
LIJ

m

.J
.J

«

~

«
a:

I

/
fI

, .... .... ,

Z

...4

!

, ....
.....' _1 "

I
1
I

I
I

I
I
I

hJI

r--r-',
I

\

Geology and Mineral Resources

U)

ILl

-<

II:

:E

0

,.,,.

::l

0

U)

oCt

_l

II:
..J

\

«

c a:
U.I
Z

z
~

Cl

a:

,,~

U.I

,,

'\,,

:l

•ac •"z

ID

! !!

0

.
c

~ (:>

,
"

DOD 0·i
, .Ii
,

\.1"

~

:

Z

>-

. J

Q

C5

a

z

l .~

"

.~

ILl

...J

III

0

.J

w

~

~~

~ ·f
~~ 1

<t

...

, ;

.

d -

Ii

~

"l:
.l!
~ ~

~

~ ~

·n

)

~

t

ti

"'" ·1 ct,~~'
.~ q:~ •
J' .~ ~.~ ~ .:! ~
.~

C1

~

...i'> 1
~ ~
~

.. 1

~

II

II: -!
~ ~
~ ~ ~

J ~... "i <:! ~l
~

CHAPTER I

The Land and the Peop}e-I
95 i:
,
CC

We, the People oj India JJ

"WEI THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, hfloin'lJo[emn/yre."lo,dlO C9ns-

titute India into' a SOVpREIGN DEMOCRATIC·,
REPU BLle and to secure to ai/lit. citi~e".':

JUST ICE, social, economic and political;
Li BERTY

of thought, expression, belie/, faith and UJor,hip" ; ,

EQUALITY 01 status and of opportunity;
among them all

and to promote

FRATERNITY assuring the dignity 01 the individual an'd ,th,'
unity 01 the N afion ;
,"

IN

OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY tltis' trD,ntyoo:""tla
d(JY of November, 1949,' do 'HEREBY, AlJOIYTl
ENACT AND GIVE' TO OllRSELVES THIS·,;
CONST1TUTION",'
,
'

Thus the preamble of the CoNSTITUTION OF' INDIA, which came into f~
on the 26th day of January, 1950.

2. How many are "WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA"? In what places do WE
live? In what manner do WE obtain our means of living? At 'What rate hive WE
been growing in number during the last few -decades? What has been thtfeffeetl..
of this growth upon our means of living? What is the inferenae to' be 'drtiWR"
from the experience of the last few decades about the probable growth of our
numbers and our means of Jiving during the next few d~cades ?We 'need answers to these questions. We need ~hem, not because of idle
curiosity, but in order to help us achieve du~ ~gh, pprposes eashrined
jn our CONSTITUTION.

CHAPTER I: THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE- I 95 1

A - Land Area per capita
THIS REPORT cannot be easy reading. It is loaded with figures, and
figures are wearisome. It is all the more necessary, therefore, that attention
should be drawn, at the outset, to two figures which are of fundamental importance. They are:
First,- (81 crores of acres'. This is the total area of our land.
Secondly,- '36 crores of people'. This was the population of the Indian
Union at some point of time between tho 26th January, 1950 when the
Indian Union was born and the 1st March, 1951, the reference date of the
Census.
4. Can these figures be relied on as correct ? Yes. There is no room
for reasonable doubt on the point. The first figure- 81 crores of acres- and
indeed all figures of land area which are borne on the books of tht! Survey of
India, are perhaps the most accurate among the national statistics of India (or,
for that matter, of any country in the world). They are based 011 exact
measurements, scientifically designed and carried our by a highly trained
professional agency over a long series of years.
5. The 195 1 Census count yielded a total of 356,879,394 as the number
present at sunrise on the 1st March, 1951. May we take it that the
count was correct- if not to. the last integer- at least to the nearest
lakh? May we take it as certain that the number was 3,569Iakhs? No. That
would be rating the completeness of the census count too high.
We have indeed made the best possible effort to take a correct cOWlt. There
are very good reasons to believe that the count must have been at least as close
to the truth on this occasion as at any previous census in India. But until
recently we had no knowledge about how close to the truth the census COWlt
used to be in the past. At this census, Government decided that a verification
of the census count shou1d be carried out under conditions designed te yield
reliable information on this point.
The results of that operation have been published'" already along with a
detailed account of the manner in which the verification was carried out. The
conclusion has been stated thus :
"For every thousand persons included in the census count 11 other
persons were probably omitted. It is a reasonably safe conclusion
that the number of persons omitted (per thousand counted) could
not have exceeded 12 or fallen short of 10."
• "Sample Ve~ification of the 1951 Census Count": Census of India Paper No.1 of 19M,

~

LAND AREA PER CAPITA

6. From this it would follow that the actual number of people present (at
sunrise of the 1st March, 1951) must have exceeded the published total by not
less than 36 lakhs and not more than 43 lakhs. It is convenient to express the
same result in another way. We may say that the published total of 35 crores
and 69 lakhs represented the actual number of people present-not indeed on the
1st March 1951, the reference date of the Census, but on some other day a
few months earlier. Our knowledge of the rate at which our numbers are growing
in recent years (this will be explained in a later chapter) helps us to fix this earlier
date within fairly narrow limits. It must have preceded the census day by not
less than 10 months and not more than 12 months. On some day in MarchApril 1950- it is reasonably certain the census count of 35 crores and 69 lakhs
represented the exact number of people present in the territory covered by the
1951 Census.
7. But the territory covered by the 1951 Census is not quite the same
thing as the territory of India. There is a fringe of tribal territory in the northeast frontier (known as the Part B Tribal Areas of Assam) where the census has
never been taken. A figure of about six lakhs of people has been mentioned
as the probable number of people living there. Though little better than a
guess, it indicates the order of magnitude which might be borne in mind.
When preparations for the 1951 Census were taken in hand, it became
clear that a complete count was impossible in the conditions prevailing in the
state of Jammu and Kashmir. Government decided that the information likely
to be secured by an incomplete count was not worth the effort, expense and
very considerable strain on administrative resources, which arc necessarily
involved in census-taking. Hence the entire state of Jammu and Kashmir
had to be excluded from the census count. It is possible, however, from
past census figures to make a fairly firm estimate of the population of Jammu
and Kashmir. This may be taken to be about «lakhs.
It is reasonably safe on these facts to conclude : First,- chat the total

number of people living in India had passed the 36-crore-mark well before the census
day; and Secondly,- that it had not reached that figure on 26th January, 1950*.
8. Given the two basic figures- 81 crores of acres and 36 crores of peoplewe may derive a third, namely,- '2 1/4 acres'. This is our 'land area per capita'.
Let us suppose that the entire territory of India is divided (with mathematical exactitude) equally among all the people living in India, we may each
-The title of this chapter- "The Land and the People-I9SI" - 81 well as aU other statements made
about the people (as enumerated at the 1951 Census) should therefore be regarded as referable, not to a
specific point of time, but to the interval betw~e~ the 26th January. 19~o and the lit MaJch
19~"

3

CHAPTER I: THElLA¥D ANll~TK£~/~OPLE-I951
~..tog~. a square ,plot 1){ land- lM8!urin,;'a little roore- tm\n .one hundred
y_{ltomtWf1hto-sol1{;h M:weH as from east to west.
That .lstthtJ~latt4 ar.ea per·capita' in India. Let us keep this plot· of-land
fir1D:1r ~ ~ faltHwg·shalt1see, as we prooeed, that,the size' of'thls plot; the
D8IIIUJ"in:which it'istused, -and the-chM.ges which 'OCCUf'1ftit from. 'ollegeneratiOl»J.to alMJler.,bave a pr.of(jund :effect :on' oUf:life and livelihood.

9.. The CoNSTITUTI@N .define~ the political divisions of the COWltry as .con,.,
sisQng~f Par.l A states~. Par.l B.states,. Part C states and Part D territories~
T~ legal ,diBtinctions' have ,no special.. significance. in relatio:1 to. the life of
~t people. or .their means ,of living., Consistently with the nature and. p~ose
uf. t~ rep9r.t, it. would. be appropriate. for f us to consider, the. states and, terri~_
tories in the order of their population.
Rather more than, two-t1W:ds of the people.of India- 24 crores and 25 lakhs
- . live in. six states, in all 'of which the inhabitants number more than two crores.
The six states' are : Uttar Pradesh' {63~)" M.adras·(570), Bihar ,(402), Bombay
(360), \Vest Be'ng~l (248) and.Madhyl,l Pradesh (212). [The figures in brackets
represent the. number of people" in each stare, rounded to the.nearest lakh.]
Ther.e ~ane· 8 -othtr ,.6t~·, in' aU of which· the inhabitants number between
half-a-cror.e and two crores. These are : Hydcrabad (187), Rajasthan (153)
Orissa (146), Pdnjab{I26), Travaucore-Cochin (93)"Mysore (91), Assam (90) and
Mddhya' 'BJiru-at (80). The total number of people living in these states is
9·'crores and "66 'lakhs. There are 16 other political units all of whose inhabitants taken together, number only about 2 crores in all.. These are the states
ofldtnnlU and Kashmir (44*), Saur.ashtra (41;), Vmdhy? Pradesh (36), Patiala and
EflsLPiinjab States Union (35),. Delhi (17), Himachal Pradesh (1O),Bhopal (8),
Ajmer (7},-Ttipura (6), Manipur (6), Kutch (6), Coorg (2), Sikkim (I), Bilaspur
(1),' atld firially two other territories with' less, than half-a .. lakh each, viz.,
Chandemagore and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
10.· Fullr :infCJrmation, about, -each, '~f -these i units; "with detailed ifeferenoe·. t 0.
di~tftct· data ...win; be,f()und'm~ t)\e.-repor~ 'writtx:n.

by state census supenntenr'l
dents. It is, therefore, not necessary that, all of them. should .be ir.dividuaJly
referred . to and . discussed. iri . this report. It is, also not useful. to . do so.
because these 32 units vary so largely among themselves, both in size of P9pulation-' and . extent 'of territory, that if we tried to look at all of them at once, . we
shtrU'miss the wood for the trees and get lost in a parade of local peculiarities
whkh1may'·have· no· real significance in' the all.i.Jrtdin pjcture. That is why it
• £Sth..tte;

4.

UND LAREA FElt.CAmA

is necessary that some,,-sorvQf:gfOuping ,loLgcographiaally contiguous units
should be made. Hence the six 'zones' : North India, East India, South India
West India, Central India 'and North...West India.
ettar' Pradesh is so situated- and has such a large population that it is convenient to treat it as a zone by itself. -It is N otth India.
Bihar, Orissa, West .Bengal, Assam, .Manipur, Tripura, Sikkim and Chandernagore are grouped together as East IndJ'a.
South India consists of Madras, Mysore, Trayaneore-Cochin. and .GoQrg.
)Bombay, Saurashtra and Kuteh'make _up-; West 'india ,
Central India .takes in 'Madhya 'Pradesh, Madhya 'Eharat, UHydera~d,
Bhopal and Vindhya' Pradesh.
Rajasthan, Punjab, Patiala and East Punjab States Union, Jammu and
Kashmir, Ajmer, Delhi, Bi}aspur and Himachal Pradesh make up NDtth-

West India,
[ The total population of Andaman and Nicobar Islands is only 30,971;
and the land area is 20'58 lakhs of aaes. The figures relating .tontms,-.terrimry are not included in any' zone but are -imluded in the India,totals,']
I I, The table below shows for each zone the two basic figures~'land
area and population-- and the derived figure of land area per capita :
TABLE I

Land area
Zone

(INLAKHSOF .. P"1*latfiDn
AGRES)
(IN LMRS)

Land atM

per ·eapita

, {IN MllUlS)

North India

726

63 2

1'15

East India ,

1,675

90 1

1'86

South· India

1,075

75 6

1'42

West India

957

407

. -2,'35

Central India

1,85 2

52 3

3'·54

N~rth"West·India

1)226

,INDIA -(,xdwding JamI'ItM ", Kwhmir)

..,.,,33

INDIA (including Jammu &1 Kashmir)

'I,u6

...,,,

350

'

'3,61 3

3'~I

. 'lUI

a"iS

1ihetable brings,out,clearly-the simple1facr thatcthe:people of ·lndia,arc,_not

distributed-among-,the different zones.in 4Uly<lcind_.()f 'Olderly "pllQpenioQ.,~e

Jand area.

CtlAPTER I: tHE LAND AND THE PEOPlE-195i

B-

Topography, Soil and Rainfall

IT IS CLEAR that the people living in some zones of India have got more
land per head than their fellow-citizens in other zones. Does this mean that the
former are much better off than the latter? Central India, for instance, provides 354 cents of land, which is more than three times as large as the land area
per capita in North India- 115 cents. Are the people of Madhya Pradesh,
Hyderabad and Madhya Bharat three times as rich as those of Uttar Pradesh ?
Obviously, this cannot be. For all we know to the contrary, lIS cents of land
in North India may provide even better living than 354 cents of land in Central
India. Evidently, we should not attempt to draw conclusions of practical
significance from the figures in T ABl.E I, until we have gone some way towards
understanding the differences between the different sorts of land there are in
clifferent pans of the country, and assessed the significance of those differences
for purposes of growing foad or otherwise providing a means of living out of
the land.
Among the major factors which make a difference in this respect, the first
is topography- the nature of the terrain or the land-form of the tracts in
question.
13. Out of India's total land area of 81 crores and 26 lakhs of acres, 8 crores
and 69lakhs of acres (or 10'7 per cent) lie in mountains. The word 'mountain'
is used in this context in a strict sense- it is limited to really steep land at
a very high elevation and generally excludes all land below a limit of 7,000 feet
above sea level. Nearly two-thirds of such mountain tracts (S crores and 48
lakhs of acres) arc found in Jammu and Kashmir. The remaining one-third is
distributed in three zones as follows:
141 lakhs of acres in East India;

97 lakhs of acres in North-West India (excluding Jammu & Kaslunir)j and
79 lakhs of acres in North India.

Rather less than S 1akhs of acres are to be found in South India. There are no
mountains, in the strict sense of the term, in West India and Central India.
Mountains are impressive affairs- even inspiring- to people who live far
away from them and go there for rest and recreation or occasional business.
But they are of little use for settlement of people who wish to cultivate the land
arid' grow food. In general the land is far too steep. It is extremely
difficult to find (or make) plots of land on which food or other crops may be
gro~. Scholars who have made a special study of this subject estimate that
6

TOPOGRAPHY, SOIL AND RAiNFALL

95 per cent of the superficial area of land in mountain tracts should be writtel\.
off, from the point of view of practical farming.

14. The write-off is not so heavy when we tum to other kinds of tracts.
It has been suggested that the appropriate ratios are 75 per cent in hilly tracts,
2S per cent in plateaus and perhaps as low as 5 per cent in the plains.
We may use the term 'hill' to cover all kinds of weathered highlands (except
mountains) without reference to the level at which they are situated. The term
would include practically the entire area of all ranges other than the Himalayan
and also the foothills of the Himalayan range upto the limit already mentioned
- about 7,000 feet above sea level.
Hilly tracts as thus defined comprise 15 crores and 9 lakhs of acres
(or 18'6 per cent) of all land in India. They are distributed as follows :
525 lakhs of acres in East India;
333 lakhs of acres in Central In dia;
278 lakhs of acres in South India; and
198 lakhs of acres in West India.

There are 88 lakhs of acres in North-West India outside Janunu and Kashmir
and there are 27 lakhs of acres in Janunu and Kashmir. There are 41 lakhs of
acres in North India and 21 lakhs in Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

15. Plateaus may be defined, in the conditions of this country, as including
all relatively fiat tracts of land which lie between one thousand feet and three
thousand feet above sea level. Such tracts measure 22 crores and 48 lakhs of
acres, or 27'7 per cent of all land in India. Almost exactly one-half of all
plateaus (II crores and 25 lakhs of acres) is found in Central India. The
remaining half is distributed as follows :
300 lakhs of acres in North.We~t India (excluding Jammu & Kashmir);
286 lakhs of acres in South India;
284 lakhs of acres in West India; and
204 lakhs of acres in East India.

A fringe of North India measuring 341akhs of acres is also plateau-land.
16. Finally, we may come down to the plains, of which we have 34 crores and
99lakhs of acres- that is to say, 43'0 per cent of all land in India. The plains
are distributed as follows :
805 lakhs of acres in East Ind.ia;
742 1akhs of acres in North-West India;
572 lakhs of acres in North India;
S06 lakhs of acres in South India;
476 lakhs of acres in West India; and
395 lakhs of acres in Central India.

7

CHAPT,E,R J: TIlE LAND ,AND ,THE, PEOPLE-I 95 1

As a rule, ~hese ,tracts, axe, w.e best for,purPoses of culti:v~tjQn ap,d; ~~­
~ent'o{pe~ple. ' This is so not only be~a,use me amount of land, -which :ff;Qwres
to be written off is relativelY small, but the chances of findi,qg fertile
.SGil ,are better in the plains than in the plateaus where (as a rule and'ilnlike
the valleys in hilly trocts) fertile land is scarce.
17. This is not to say, however, ~at all the 35 crores of plain-land are ,fernIe
or even ~tiv.able. Far from it. There are vast stretches of land in some
, parts, of the COWltry which can be called 'land' only in a tedmical ~eQSe.
'A ootable, instance of such 'land' is the RaAIl of Kutch, which
. .measures as much as 59 lakhs of acres. Another type of such land)s: the
stretch of sandy waste* in the Rajasthan Dry Area which measures about
~,ctores aad ,54 lakhs of acres. The capacity of such land to support life is
negligible. The sandy wastes and marshy land which occur in many plain tracts,
as isolated patches, are one thing; continuous stretches of waste like those
mentioned above are in a different category. In any realistic assessment of
usable resources, it is necessary that they should be left out of the reckoning.
We have got altogether 3'3 ,crores of acres of such land in North-West India
and about three-quaners of a crore in West India.
i

18. We ~y p.ow ~,um up me :result of our review of the topography of the
different zones from r4e point of view of distinguishing what may oe ~led
.the 'topographically usable area' from other area .,not so usable. The
relevant figures are shown in one view in the table below :
TABLE 2
(IN LAKHS OF ACRES)

T.Qtal
Topographical factor,~
Deducl
land r---.. unusable
area Mountains Hills Plateaus Plains area

Topographically
usable area

583
1,055
765
643

North-West India

726
1,675
1,075
957
.1.,852
1,226

J. d1 K.)
INDIA (including J. '" K.)

~,535

8,136

4,997
5,°44

ZOlll

North India
East Ind,ia
South India
...west Ind,iB
,~~tJ8.l.lndia
INDIA (excluding

7tS3Z

79
145
4

97
3z5
873

333 1, 125

572
804
506
476
395

88

300

742

143
620
310
3 14
55 0
583

I t4"

Zt Z3 Z

3,495
3,498

3,08:&

41
2
5 1
27 8
198

34
204

286
284

1,506 ,z,Z48

1,302

643

No'l'_ (i) Individual figures have been rounded to lakhs ; hence the differences jn totals.
(ii) India figures include 21 lakhs of acres- HilIs- of Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
·This is not the whole of the territory which has been classified as the 'Dcllc;rt S.ub·Reiion', but

oalJ • part of it.

j

tOPOGRAPHY. SOIL ANb RAINFALL

19. It is not to be supposed that all topographically usable area is culti,vable. Even within this area, there are large extents of land which are little
. better than barren rock and have little or no soil cover. We should now consider
. the nature and extent of sOlI cover available for land in different parts of the

country.
Unfortunately such information as we have been able to get together is
mostly of a descriptive nature. There is next to no information of a quantitative character about the actual areas or productivity in terms of crop yields
per acre of different types of soils. The following is a very brief summary of
~ av,ailable information :
(i) Four main groups of soils are fOWld extensively allover India.
Among them, the alluvial group is by far the most productive.
They arc distributed over practically the whole
of the Gangetic plains in Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and
extend to the PWljab and parts of Assam and Orissa.
The coastal tracts of southern India arc also alluvial, especially
at the mouths of the rivers, where they arc known as deltaic
alluvium. The soils arc deficient in phosphoric acid, nitrogen and
humus, but not generally in potash and lime. Interspersed within
the alluvial group, are patches of saline and alkaline soils which
contain varying amounts of soluble salts. Such type of soils are
fOWld in Uttar Pradesh ('usar' land), Bombay Deccan 8l1d a portion
of North Bihar.

(ii) Then there are the black soils which are loamy to clayey in texture,
vary in depth, and contain lime katzkar in varying percentages,
and free calcium carbonate. These soils are generally suitable for
c.ultivation of cotton and are known in many places as 'black cotton
soils' or 'regur'. Resembling tropical black earth, they arc vcry,welldefined soils which occupy the greater part of Bombay and Saurashtra,
western parts of Madhya' Pradesh, Madhya Bharat, and Hyderabad
and some parts of Madras including the districts of Tirunelveli ' and
Ramanathapuram. The soils are fairly fertile and very useful fur
commercial crops. They are generally deficient in nitrogen, phosphoric acid and organic matter, 'but potash and; lime are usually high .

.(iiI) Another fairly well-:defilled and extensive group consists of red soils.
,They differ widely in depth and fertility in different parts of India
and are generally of mediUll} to.low fertility.

They cover verYIhq:ge

tracts of,Madras, MYiore, south-east Bombay, . east lIyderabad

T9

CHAPTER I: THE LAND AND THE l'EOPLE-I95t

and a strip of tract running along the eastern part of Madhya
Pradesh to Cbhota Nagpur and Orissa. In the north, the red
soil area extends into and includes the , greater part of the Santhal
Parganas in Bihar, the Birbhum district of West Bengal, the
.Mirzapur, Jhansi and Hamirpur districts of Uttar Pradesh, northern
portion of Madhya Bharat, the Aravallies and the eastern half of
Rajasthan.
(iv) The last of the four main groups consists of laterite and lateritic
soils. Soils of this group are derived by the atmospheric weathering
of several types of rocks under monsoon conditions of alternating
dry and wet periods. Well developed laterite and lateritic soils are
found on the summits of hills of the Deccan, Madhya Bharat, Madhya
Pradesh, and of the Rajmahal and Eastern Ghats, and certain parts
of Orissa, Bombay, Malabar and Assam. The soils are deficient in
potash, phosphoric acid and lime. On higher levels these soils
are exceedingly thin and gravelly, but on lower levels and in the
valleys they consist of heavy loams and clays. On the whole, these
soils are poor.
(v) Other miscellaneous types of soils include desert or arid soils occurring in the regions having low rainfall, e. g., Ajmer) eastern
Rajasthan etc. Marshy or peaty soils occur over small areas in
Travancore, and in parts of West Bengal, Orissa and Madras. Hill
soils, which arc generally sandy or red loam occur in the hilly
regions of West Bengal, Punjab and Assam.
20. We cannot grow food unless we have topographically usable land with
at least the minimum of useful soil. But land alone will not do; even if it is
perfectly level and has the most fenile soil cover, it cannot be used to grow
food or any other crops unless there is rain.

The amount of rain that falls on Indian territory every year, and year
after year, is something colossal. Let us consider an inch of rain falling en an
acre of land. The water which thus collects disappears from view very quickly
and one does not, therefore, appreciate the fact that the quantity is qtrite large
- the weight of this water is no less than 2,800 maunds. On an average of good,
bad and indifferent years, and taking into account all parts of the country" we
get rather more than 42 inches of rain falling on every acre of land every year.
That is to say, we get well over one lakh of maunds of water on every acre of land.
We have noted already that there are 81 crores of acres. Those who feel curious
about the total amount of our rain-water-supply may do the multiplication
10

'fOPOGRAPttv, SOli. ANti RAI~Fili

sum for th~ms~lves 1 If only this enormous amount of rain fell evenly both in
space and m trme, the amount of food which is now grown on our land can
be gr~tly increased. Unfortunately, nature distributes rain even more Wlevenly
t~ soils .. Some tracts get too much rain, many get too little. A great deal of
ram falls ill such places and at such times that it cannot be used to any
good purpose.
21. One of the maps at the beginning of this chapter shows the division of
the country into five 'rainfall belts' which have been named as follows:

Rainfall belt
Blue belt
Dark green belt
Light green belt
Brown belt.
Yellow belt .

Annual rainfall
Exceeding 75 inches j
Between 50 and 75 inches;
Between 30 and 50 inches;
Between 15 and 30 inches;
Bchnv IS inches.

The blue belt and the dark green belt cover almost exactly a third of the
country. They are well provided with enough rain, which is generally, though
not invariably, also dependable.
The light f,'Teen belt covers almost exactly another third of the country.
Here the rainfall, if timely, is adequate; but the vagaries of the monsoon arc apt
to cause occasional failure of crops and consequent distress.
The brown belt and the yellow belt, taken together, cover the remaining
third of the country. Here the seasonal fluctuations are so frequent, that they
are more or less regularly expected; and when they occur, they cause a great
deal of hardship to the people and expense to Government. The yellow belt
has so little rain that a great many people do not live there. The brown belt
where one-fourth of our people live, is exposed to special hazards which are a
permanent problem for the people and the Government.
22. If we are to make an intelligent study of why the people happen to be as
unequally distributed as they are in different parts of our cOWltry, it is essential
we should get behind the existing political divisions of the country into states
and their grouping in zones. We should visualise the country as consisting of
different parts which are distinguished from one another by differences of
topography, soil, rainfall- the major factors which determine how much of
'land' can be used to grow food and the degree of its usefulness for the purpose.
These, in turn, determine how many people could make a living on the land.
From the point of view merely of topography, the country may be divided
notionally into five broad 'regions', viz., (1) the Himalayan region, (2) the
Northern Plains region, (3) the Peninsular Hills and Plateau region, (4) the
II

tltAPt:ett, 1: ',WI I::.ANbl./OO) ;THE ·PMN.!-19~t
,Western, ~Ghats' . and, G:oasbal! Re8im", and '(5) I the <6asttrn >Ghats. and' wastal
f'egion. These" regions, rmwever,! '.are ,very ·large ·\I1lits..1Big differoaoes
'occur within them because of,Gilferences 'in,the amount of "rainfall, ,68 'taIso
tOISOOle extent beQwse of vHiaticos in;the.sWs. ' So, these .regi0llS have, been
divided'Dlto 15 'sulM'egi<m.s~:as : shewn below :
I

Code
No.
I.

Coth
~ion

No.

Sub-Region

{

I' I
1'2

Western Himalayan
Eastern Himalayan

f

2.' I
2.' 2.
2.' 3
2.' 4

Lower Gangetic .plains
Upper Gangetic P,lams
Trans-Gangetic Plains

Himalayan

2. Northern Plains

•

L

The Desert

North
r 3'3' 3 'Nonh·WestiHills
North-East
I

'3~2.

Central.HtlIs & P-lateau
Plateau
3' 4 . -North Deccan
3' 5 South Deccan

3. Peninsular Hills and Plateau

~

4. Western Ghats and Coastal

f 4' I Gujrat-Kathiawar
l ,'4' 2. ,: Malabar';'K~kan

I
l

s. Eastern Ghats and Coastal •

. f 5' I
.L 5' 2.

North Madras & Orissa Coastal
South Madras

These sub.;.regions; in .tun1, have beert tlivided into 'natural' divisions' each
df -tvhich is' either an erttire 'state or a group of contiguous districts ~ within, a
state. The data collected at the'l 951' Census 'have been tabulated for these rranrral
divisions and it is hoped thiS' will ftlcilitate' more intensive' 'StUdy and '"better
understanding of the .significance of our basic flOpulation.data.
I

·c-_ 'High ·'&ttilJ· ~1ltgions
'-;APJ?ROXIMATfiLY one-rhalfiof'the,J'COPle of Indie·live ''On ,rather .less rQQn
oi'le-quarter.of Indian·"d. ;:rhe tracts·in >which they 1Hve·(4mprise'tReJfiv.e
.ub~~',*pecified!ilt l'tiLE·a ~mt ~ite·p~.
l~

Hl$H DlNS-ITY STJ.B-'RKGIONS
TAB.tE 3"

DflUit'y

La'Hi arlil~

LtPla.ari/a,.
(N,\JMB~
Population
PER
(IN LAKHS
(IN LAKHS) SQ~'MILB) OF ACRBS)

per capita

700.

8~.

53 8

77

UpPQ" Gangetic.Plaina,

389

681.

366

94 c,

Malabar.. KOnkso I

238.·

638··

239

100.

South"Madm

30fT

554.

3055 "

J 1$ ,

North Madras & Orissa Coastal

211

461

293

139

TOTAL S sUB-REGIONS.

1,845.

660"

1,79 1

9?

Nam~f, ~r..,iDfl

Lower Gang(:.tic Plain~,

(Dt CENTS)

The sub",regior:s are. anrang¢d. in order; of, density of settlement. of the.• ~pJe. OR
the land. We may examine what are the conditions of topography, soil and
rainfall which enable. the land to be used in such a way as to support much
larger numbers in these suh"regions than elsewhere.
24-1· LoWER GANGETIC PLAINS- Tha sub~regioo iIlcludos the wh()leJ of West
Befl'g~l except three sub~Himalayan. districts (JaJpaiguri,<D.ar~ling and..,Q)och';"
~j; tAe.wOOle:of.Biliaz: ,except Chhota . ,Nagpur,di\l~n .. ; aad also, Eastern
Uttat, Prac1esh (that is· to say, the districts of, Banar.as" ~ip\U', BalJia,. Gorakhppr ,.. Dooria,: Azamgarb,· Gonda and Bahraicb.).. The. total, P9Pplati~l js 700
l~ The land ,area ,.is 538 lakhslofacres·.. In tenns"ofJ124ia,.the IJPPplatiqn
ppr4'entage is.,; 19' 4; ,while the l~ area. p~rcentage, is only 6r.6f' 11le·Jamt, ara
pp..capita is.77 centS-1- against :lndia~s 2Zj~' In. tbi~,sub~, ·.the, r~~" of

variation is not very large. The land area /JI{ caPita .is; ·73' cents· in. West
BengaJ Plain, 76 cents in North Bihar Plain and 75 cents in East Uttar Pradesh
Plain:. It rises to 89 ~ents in South Bihar Plain which iricludes som~ ,hills iUld
plateau tracts. The sub-region as a whole, is one .larg~ plain,. Out. of. the
total of 77 cents per capica, 74 cents are plain-land. A'small fringe of plateau~
aruLbiU$' flccountB forrthe_,.remaining 3 ':Cents.-.
1

The·soilS' are among .the best in India. West Bengal Plain 'soils are aImoS!
wh()llY'aHtivial, rangirlg from red to brown ldams with lateritic soils in the old
aliuvialarea,1
The,.NQrth Bihar .Plain. soils are· alluvial, Md,. ca1~r~ous. In, .south: Bih~,
Plain, both alluvial and red sandy soils OccUl'.'· Thcrallu\lial soilBofIEast:! UttarPtadesh v8ey'f1'0m' sands to heavy· clays.·

13

CHAPTER I: THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE-I 95 1

The rainfaU is normally ample and rarely excessive. About 284 Iakhs of
"acres fall in the light green belt, the greater parr of the rest of the sub-region
in the dark green belt and a small fringe in the blue belt. The average rainfall
varies from 56 inches in the West Bengal Plain to 44 inches in East Uttar Pradesh
and South Bihar Plain. The average number of rainy days ranges from 73 in
West Bengal Plain to 50 in East Uttar Pradesh.
Out of the total of 538 lakhs of acres, 512 lakhs of acres are topographically
usable. Out of this again, the net area sown is 356 lakhs of acres, or 51 cents
ptff capita. Double-cropping is heavy- in fact the heaviest of all the sub-regions
of India. It covers 27"9 per cent of the net area sown. Irrigation is also
high- 21 ·6 per cent of the gross sown area.
Fallow land is relatively small, being only 9"7 per cent of the net area sown.
Unused* land is also small (10"8 per cent of the total land area). There is very
little forest. Minerals are scarce in this sub-region t. l\1.ica is produced in
South Bihar Plain (8·6 per cent of India's output). There is also some saltpetre.
25. UPPER GANGETIC PLAINS- This sub-region includes all the districts
of Uttar Pradesh with the exception of (i) the ten districts already mentioned
as included in the Lower Gangetic Plains; (ii) the five Himalayan districts
of Garhwal, Tchri- Garhwal, Nainital, Almora and Dehra Dun; and (iii) the
five upland and hilly districts of Jhansi, Jalaun, Hamirpur, Banda and Mirzapur.
Three hundred and eighty-nine lakhs of people live here over a land area of
366 lakhs of acres. In terms of India, the population percentage is 10· 9 and
the land area percentage is 4·8. The land area per capita is 94 cents.
Practically the whole of it (93 cents) consists of plain tracts only. The land
area per capita is slightly larger in West Uttar Pradesh Plain (99 cents) than in
Central Uttar Pradesh Plain (89 cents).
The soils of the sub-region are mostly alluvial. They vary widely in
texture from clay and loam to sandy types. A few typical black cotton soils also
occur in Allahabad district.
The rainfall is not so heavy as in the Lower Gangetic Plains. The main
bulk of the Upper Gangetic Plains (248 lakhs of acres) falls in the light green
belt: only a small area (3 I lakhs of acres) falls in the dark green belt. This
• This excludes not only the net arca sown, current fallows and forests but also uncultivated
and which is specifically classified as not available for cultivation. This last item would include
1ao<1 put to various kinds of qU8si-agrieulruraJ and non-agricultural uses, such a8 village sites. town
sites, mines and quarries, roads, rivers, channels etc.

t A part of the ~Ranig8nj coalfield which extends into Burdwan district is counted as part of tP~
mineral resources of the adjOining North-East Plateau sub"region~

14

HIGH DENSITY SUB-REGIONS

is counterbalanced by a somewhat larger area (87 lakhs of acres) falling in the
bro~n belt.
Follo~ng the diminis~g trend (as one moves up the Gangetic
plains) the average ramfall drops from 44 Inches in East Uttar Pradesh of the Lower
Gangetic Plains to 37 inches in Central Uttar Pradesh and then to 33 inches
in West Uttar Pradesh. The average number of rainy days also diminishes from
50 in East Uttar Pradesh to 45 in Central Uttar Pradesh and 40 in West Uttar
Pradesh. As the rainfall diminishes in amount, it tends also to become less
Out of the total area of 366 lakhs of acres, 346 lakhs of acres are
dependable.
topographically usable. The net area sown is 237 lakhs of acres, or 61 cents
per capita. The double-crop percentage is heavy-:- 24' 2 per cent; so also
irrigation- 24' 6 per cent. Fallow land is even smaller than in the Lower
Gangetic Plains (5' 6 per cent). But the ratio 'Of unused land is rather higher
(being 14' 8 per cent). The area classified as forest is negligible and minerals
of any significance are practically non-existent. [SnuB quantities of saltpetre
are worked at some places.]
26. MALABAR-KoNKAN- This sub-region includes the entire west
coast of India to the south of the Daman Ganga river. It consists of Greater
Bombay, Bombay-Konkan (i.e., districts of Thana, Kolaba, Ratnagiri and
Kanara), West Madras (i.e., Malabar, South Kanam and Nilgiri districts),
Coorg and Travancorc-Cochin. Two hundred and thirty-eight lakhs of people
live here in an area covering 239 lakhs of acres. In terms of India, the population percentage is 6' 6 and the land area percentage is 2' 9. The land area
per capita consists of 100 cents. The terrain here is such that it is impossible
to demarcate a topographically homogeneous territory without cutting clear
across administrative boundaries down to district level. So, the sub-region
includes the main chain of the Western Ghats as well as the narrow fringe of
coastal plains to its west. Areas of very varied topography are, therefore,
necessarily included, and there are corresponding variations in rainfall. The
pattern of land utilisation and density of settlement of population differ sharply
as between the coastal strip, the slopes of the ghats, and the heights. Out of
the total of 100 cents of land area per capita in this sub-region, hills contribute
56 cents, while plains accotUlt only for 40 cents.
There are 3 cents of
plateau-land and one cent of mountain--Iand.
The soils in this sub-region vary from medium black in the north, to the red
gravelly, loamy and lateritic soils in the south. Red loarns and yellow
loams predominate in Travancore-Cochin.
Rainfall is very heavy in Malabar-Konkan- heaviest in India outside
the Eastern Himalayan sub-region. The annual rainfalI is over 100 inches
J$

CHAPTER I: THE LAND AND~ TIll: PEOPLE-1951

aluog" the west· coast from AHlDag near Bombay to CochJn in tM. SOutR;
A ,few· stations in Coorg and on :the Cardamom biUs in Travancore-Cochin get·
weU lOver 200 inches of rain in a year. Several stations on the western, slop,es:of '.
the, Sooth Kanara and Malabar districts receive rainf~U of the order of 180 ittmah '
On. the eastern side. of the ghats the annual rainfall is much less. The Nilgi~s.,·
for instance, receive about 55-60 inches and quite a few of the stations receive·;'
less; than 40 inches.
All this is mainly the south-west monsoon. TJur
sOOlhern'halfof thlt sub..region also gets a little rain from the north",easn l
monsoon. Thus the greater part of this sub-region (194 lakhs of acres) falls ,in
the,:blue belt and about 32 lakhs of acres in the dark green belt.
The average number of rainy days ranges from 121 in West Madras, 118'
in Coorg and Travancore-Cochin to 95 in Bombay-Konkan and 74 in Greater
Bombay. The sub-region is, therefore, one of the very few parts of India, of
which it can be said that it never suffers from drought. Out of the total area
of 239 lakhs of acres, the topographically usable area is 128 lakhs- the hilly
country accounts for a heavy write. off. The net area sown is 73 lakhs of acres,
or 31 cents per capita. Forty-six per cent of the land is classified as faYow- a .
very high ratio, (in fact, the highest among all the sub-regions), But the unuse4,
land ratio is nearly as low as in the Lower Gangetic Plains (10'7 per cent).
The double-crop percentage is I I . 0 and irrigation percentage is
- both of them being somewhat below the all-India average.

I2. '3

The area classed as forest is very large (66 lakhs of acres out of a classified
area of 231 lakhs) , The forests arc also valuable. Fishing makes a sigI_lifican~,
contribution to food supply. The sands of Travancore-Cochin yield ,ilmenite
and monazite which are the principal minerals. Small amounts of mica,
manganese and iron ore are also produced, Salt is made along the coast,
27. SOUTH MADRAS- This sub-region consists mainly of the Carnatic plai~.
It'stretches as an extensive tract flanked on the west and' north-west bY.,.the'
Western and the Eastern Gha:ts and bordered on the east and south:-east bY,tije
Bay of Bengal and Gulf of Mannar, and includes the following distriCts =
TirunelveH, Ramanathapuram, Madurai 1 Tanjore, Tiruchirapa}li, South Arcot~,.
Chinglepur, Madras, North Arcot, Chittoor, Salem and Coimratore. Three'
hundred <lnd seven lakhs of people live here on· 355 Jakhs of acres ofland.l In
ttmns. .of India, the population percentage is 8· 5 and the land area percetttaget
is 4·4. The land area per capita is liS cents. This breaks uP.into'76.centB of.:
pl~ns, 28 cents of hills and I I cents of plateaus. The main hilly country lies
in the west and the north-west where thC land drops rather abl'\1ptIy near
the'.
,
,

16'

HIGH DENSIty SOB-REGIONS

hills and later slopes gradually towards the sea.
isolated hills within this sub-region.

In addition; there are several

In the major part of the interior of this sub-region, there are .red loarns,
and medium black soils. Co::'stal alluvium, though relatively smaller in eXtent
is of much value.
Unlike the rest of India, the principal rainy season of this sub-region do.es not
coincide with the SOL !1-wesT monsoon. As the entire area is hidden by, the
Western Ghats (except for Ih(! smul opening called the Palghat Gap about 20
miles wide) the full blast oflhe rain-bearing winds of the south-west monsoon
is not felt in this sub-region. October to December is the main rainy season,
when about 60 % of rainfall occurs in the coastal strip and about 40 % in the
interior. While the average annual rainfall is 37 inches and the average number
of rainy days is 49, there are considerable local variations within the sub-:region.
The main bulk of the sub-region (275 lakhs of acres) falls in the light green
belt, while 70 lakhs of acres fall in the brown belt. Most of the latter and a
good part of the former are affected by considerable fluctuations in the amount,
timing, lli1d duration of rainfall. Out of the total land area of 355 lakhs of acres
269 are topographically usable. The net area sown is 134 iakh., of acres or 44
cents per capita. Fallow land is relatively large, being 38' 5 per cent. TheN
is a fair amount of double-crop (I6'7 per cent) while the irrigation percentage
(33' 6) is the highest among all the sub-regions. The percentage of unused
land is rdati vely sm:J.ll (I2' 8).
Of the land area, 14' 9 per cent is classed
as forest. Fair amounts of varied mineral deposits are known to exist,
of which mat,rnesite, chromite, iron are, lignite, limestone and gypsum are the
more important. [Actual working on any significant scale is, however, practically limited to magnesite.] Salt is made all along the coast.
28. NORTII MADRAS AND ORISSA COASTAL- This sub-region includes all
the east coast districts of Orissa and Madras from BaJasore in the north to
Pulicat lake in the south. The districts are : Balasore, Cuttack, Puri, part of
Ganjam, Visakhaparnam, Srikakulam, East Godavari, West Godavari, Gwuur,
Krishna and Nellore. Two hundred and eleven lakhs of people live here
on 293 lakhs of acres of land. In terms of India, the population percentage
is 5' 8 and the land area percentage is 3' 6. The land area per capita is
139 cents. It ranges from 102 cents in the Orissa Coastal division to iS6 in
North Madras division. The sub-region includes the Eastern Ghats which are
of an average height of about 2,000 feet 1 while some of the peaks are over
5,000 feet in elevation. The break up of the land area per capita is therefore

17

CHAPTER I: THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE-I951

loS cents of plains, 29 cents of hills and 2 cents of plateaus. There are no
mountains.
The alluvial soils of the coast (mainly deltaic) are very fertile. As one goes
inland, they give place to black cotton and red ferruginous types.
The average annual rainfall is 57 inches in the Orissa Coastal division and
the average number of rainy days is 71.
The averages fall to 39 and 50 respectively in North Madras division. The bulk of the land (193 lakhs of acres)
falls in the light green belt; 641akhs of acres, mostly in Orissa Coastal di vision,
fall in the dark green belt; while 35 lakhs of acres (all of which lie in the North
,Madras division) fall in the brown belt. The rainiest part of the year is from
JW1e to September.
This sub-region also gets rain from the north-cast
monsoon during October and November.
Out of the tota11and area of 293 lakhs of acres, 235 lakhs are topographically
usable.
The net area sown is 1I9 lakhs of acres or 57 cents per capita, The
land cJassified as fallow is 27' 5 per cent. Double-crop is distinctly higher than
in South Madras being 22' 1 per cent, while irrigation percentage is nearly as
high (32' 9). The percentage of unused land is practically the same as in South
Madras (12' 7)· Forests are also nearly the same (14' 3 per cent),
Mineral
production is limited to the mining of mica in Nellore, manganese in Visakhapamam and a little chromitc in Krishna.
Salt is made all along the coast.
29· ALL FIVE SUB-REGIONS- If we consider all the five high density
sub-regions together and compare the territory with the country as a whole,
the main results are as follows :

/ - The population of the five sub-regions is 1,845 lakhs against India's
3, 61 3 (or 50' 1 per cent). The land area is only 1,791 lakhs of acres
against India's 8,126 (or 22'0 per cent). So the land area per
cap£ta is only 97 cents against India's 225 (or 43' I per CL-nt).
//- But the topographical components of the land in the five sub-regions
are far more favourable for cultivation, as shown in TABLE 4. If
TABLE 4
we write-off 95 % of mountains,
Percentage of total land area 75 % of hills, 25 % of plateaus
and 5 % of plains, we are left
Topogt'4phical
High det&sity
India
with 81 cents of topographical1y
c01ft#>onenrs
sub-remons
•
~,-_r_ _ _ _ _~_o._ _ _ _ _
usable land in the high density
Plains
Plll,teaus
Hills.
Mountains ,

IS

80

43

3
17

28

roo

100

18
1I

b

su -regions out of 97 cents of
the entire land area per capita.
A similar write-off leaves us
only 151 cents out of 225 cents

ttlGIt lJENSITY Sua-REGIONS

of land area per capita in India. Actually these 151 cents ate
reduced to 140 cents when such 'land' as the Rann of Kutch and
the Thar desert are written off the plains of India. The write-off
is only 16% for the five sub-regions, while it is 33 to 38 per cent for
India.
1Il- The distribution of the land among different rainfall belts is also
more favourable in the high density sub-regions as shown in
TABLE 5
TABLE 5· It should be noted that
the ratios of land falling in the
Percentage of lotalland area blue belt and the dark green belt
---.. are very nearly the same in
High density
India
sub-regions
Rainfall belts
both cases. The
advantage
I I
possessed by the high density
II
Blu~ belt .
21
Dark green belt .
23
sub-regions
is the smallness
Light green helt .
56
37
of the brown belt and the
10
24
Brown belt.
Yellow belt.
7
absence of the yellow belt, and
a
corresponding excess of the
roo
100
light green belt.
IV- When we considcr the net area sown per capita, we find the difference
between the high density sub-regions and the country as a whole
is considerably narrowed down. The figure is 50 cents for the
former and 79 ccnts for the latter. From what has already been
said it is clear that, acre for acre, the sown area in the high
density sub-region:-; must be more productive than the sown area
elsewhere in India, because it includes a much larger proportion of
the fertile alluvium of the plains, and a much smaJ]er proportion
of the less fertile :soils of the plateaus. Higher natural fertility
enables less land to be left fallow; while more ampJe rainfall
enables more land to be irrigated and more land to be sown more than
once. The comparative figures of land use are shown in TABLE 6 on
next page.

19

CHAPTER r: THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE-I951
TABLE 6
High dcnsity

Indices (If land use

r
r
2.

A

3·
4·

B

2.
3·

4·

Percentage of net area sown to total land area
Percentage of net area sown to topographically
usable area
Double-crop percentage
Irrigation percentage
Fallow percentage
Percentage of classified land ofForests
Other land 'unavailable for cultivation'.
Unused land

sub-regions

India

50

35

62
23
25
18

56
13
16

II

15
16
17

17
12

22

D - Low Density Sub-Regions
WE MAY NOW tum by way of contrast to those sub-regions where dt."llsicy
is low and the land area per capita is correspondingly high. The extreme
instance is the Desert sub-region and next in order arc the two Himalayan
sub-regions. Lastly, there are three sub-regions in the northern half of the
Peninsular Hills and Plateau region- in all of which the density is well below the
mean in India. On the whole, the six sub-regions cover a little less than one-half
of India's land, and the people living there number only between one-fifth and
one-fourth of India's population. The following table shows the population,
land area, density and land area per capita of these six sub-regions:
TABLE 7

Density
N arne of sub-region

The Desert
Western Himalayas .
Eastern Himalayas
North-West Hills
North Central Hills & Plateau
North-East Plateau
TOTAL 6 SUB-REGIONS

20

(NUMBER Land area Land arca
PER
Population
(IN LAKHS per capita
(IN LAKHS) SQ. MILE) OF ACRES) (IN CENTS)

46
90
124
104
138

61
68
118
163
164

290

79 2

192

482
85 2
674
40 9
537
967

1,047
944542
394
389
333

129

3,921

495

LOW DENSITY SUB-REGIONS

We shall now examine what are those conditions of topography, soil and
rainfall which distinguish these sub-regions from others, the nature of land use
and its relation to the density of settlement of the people.
31. THE DESERT-' This sub-region consists of the following western
districts of Rajasthan: Ganganagar, Bikaner, Churu, Jodhpur, Barmer, Jalore
Pall, Nagore and Jaisalmer.
The greater part of the sub-region consists of a
land surface on which there is no running water.
There are some groups of
hills occurring in the eastern part of Jodhpur on the western side of the Aravalli
range. Out of the total land area per capita, namely 1,047 cents, 971 cents are in
plains,63 cents are in plateaus and 13 cents are in hills. Two hundred and fiftyfour lakhs of acres- that is to say, 552 cents per capita- are, as already explained,
hardly capable of supporting life to any significant extent. They must be left
out of the reckoning.
EvC'Il of the rest, the soils in the south, central and
western areas are mostly light and sandy. Fertile patches increase from west
to east.
The greater part of the sub-region (90 per cent) faUs in the yellow belt.
In fact, it is three-quarlers of the entire yellow belt. The remaining ten
per cent of the SUb-region lies in the brown belt. The average rainfall over
the whole area is II inches and the average number of rainy days only 13.
Village land records are available for only 81 lakhs of acres out of 482.
According to available figures, the nct area sown per capita is 68 cents.
Double-crop is negligible.
There is a certain amount of localised irrigations
The fallow percentage is large and forests are non-existent.
There are reasons
to believe that cultivation acreages of this sub-region are under-stated. So
the net area sown per capita is probably marc than 68 cents. It is difficult to
make any sort of estimate as to what the true figure might be, but it seems unlikely
that it can be any very considerable proportion of the land area per capita.
Mineral production in the sub-region consists mainly of salt from Sambhar
lake, and gypsum in Bikaner and Jaisalmer (which accounts for most of the
country's output). A small quantity of low quality coal is also produced in
Bikaner ..
32. WESTERN HIMAI.AYAS- This sub-region consists of the entire state of
Jammu and Kashmir, two districts of the Punjab (Kangra and Simla), Himachal
Pradesh, Bilaspur and five districts of Uttar Pradesh (Garhwal, Tehri-Garhwal,
Nainital, Almora and Dehra Dun). Ninety lakhs of people live on 852 lakhs
of acres here. J aromu and Kashmir accounts for an estimated 44lakhs of people
on 594 lakhs of acres with a land area per capita of no less than 1,345 cents. This
state is, therefore, even more sparsely populated than the Desert. In the
21

CHAPTER I: THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE-I 95 1

remaining parts of the Western HimaJayan sub-region there are 46 laldlS of
people living on 258 lakhs of acres. The land area per cap!ta is 560 cents,
which is made up of 380 cents of n:ountains, 150 cents of hills, 10 cents of
plateaus and 20 cents of plains.
The soils in the low-lying plains are mostly alluvial. The texture classes
are usually loams and clay 10ams while stiff day soils are also found in the valleys.
On the biJIs, the surface and sub-surface soils are stony and sandy.
The average annual rainfal1 in Jammu and Kashmir is 39 inches. In the rest
of the Western Himalayas, the average is 50 inches; the average number of
rainy days being 70 to 75.
Out of 258 lakhs of acres (exclusive of Jammu
and Kashmir) 134 lakhs fall in the dat k green belt and 89 lakhs in the light green
belt. A small area of 35 lakhs falls in the blue belt.
Village records are availahle for 282 Jakhs of acres out of 852. If we
exclude Jammu and Kashmir, the net area sown per capica is 63 cents against a
topographically usable area of 83 cents. Double-cf<lp percentage is high (24' 5
per cent) as also irrigation (19'7 per cent). Fallow land is relatively small (10'8
per cent).
Limestone and rocksalt are the only minerals which are worked- the former
in the Himalayan foot-hills of the Punjab and the laner in M,mdi in Himachal
Pradesh. Deposits of copper, gypsum, bauxite, bentonite and magnesite are
known to exist but are not worked.
33. EASTERN HIMALAYAS- This sub-region includes the whole of Assam,
Manipur, Tripura and Sikkim an.d also three districts of West Bengal (Darjeeling,
Jalpaiguri and Cooch Behar). One hundred and twenty-four lakhs of people live
here on 674 lakhs of acres; the land area per capita is 542 cents which is much
the same as in the Western Himalayas (exclusive of Jammu and Kashmir). Out of
this total, I I4 cents are mountains, 260 cents are hills, 3 cents are plateaus and
165 cents are plains.
The major part of the plains in this sub-region is found
in the Brahn:aputra Valley whose al1uvial soils vary in colour from red to reddish
brown. Other plain soils of Assam consist of red sand and loam types.
In
he hiils, some heavy clays are found. In Manipur, the red soils are deep and
in Tripura red loarns (laterites) occur.
The rainfall is abundant, and never failing; it is well over 75 inches in the
year in most parts of the sub-region.
Owing to the peculiar configuration of
the hills in relation to the rain-bearing winds of the south-west monsoon the
amount of rainfall varies sharply frem pJace to place. Thus, Cherrapunji in the
Khasi and Jaintia Hills receives the world record rainfall of 425 inches per year,
while two stations in Nowgong district receive only 48 inches and 60 inches
1-2

LOW DENSITY SUB-REGIONS

respectively. The average rainfall for the region as a whole is 108 inches and
the number of rainy days is well over 100. Five hundred and seventy lakhs of
acres out of 674 fall, therefore, in the blue belt and practically all the remaining
land in the dark green belt. A small area of 3 lakhs in the Assam Hills appears
to fall in the light green belt.
Village records are available for 391 lakhs of acres out of 674. The net
area sown per capita is 59 cents against a topographically usable area of 225
cents.
Double-crop is 14 per cent and irrigation 16' 5. Fallow land is rather
high (29' 4 per cent). The area classed as forest is relatively small- between onesixth and one-seventh. The percentage of unused land (48' 3) is highest
among all the sub-regions of India. If these figures are compared with those
of Western Himalayas (exclusive of Jammu and Kashmir) we arrive at the first
indication ofrhe existence of some parts of India where a reserve of cultivable but
uncultivated land is still available.
This sub-region contains the only
petroleum field of India and it supplies 5 per cent of India's requirements. Coal
is found in association with petroleum in Lakhimpur district at the eastern
end of the Assam Valley. It is also found on the plateau in the Garo Hills and
in the Khasi and Jaintia Hills district.
Other minerals known to exist but
not worked, are sillmanite in Gauhati and copper in Sikkim.
34. NORTH-WEST HILLS- The sub-region is made up of the whole of
Madhya Bharat except the three lowland districts (Bhind, Gird and~orena),
and eight districts in south-eastern Rajasthan (Udaipur, Dungarpur, Banswara
Sirohi, Chittorgarh, Kotah, Bundi and Jhalawar). One hundred and four lakhs of
people live on 4091akhs of acres, with a land area per capz'ta of 394 cents. The
sub-region includes the Aravalli hill ranges which run from north-east to the
south-west and form the north-western boundary. It ac,o includes the Vindhya
and Satpura ranges running east to west, of which the latter forms the southern
bOWldary.
The composition of the land area per capita is 296 cents of plateaus,
56 cents of hills and 42 cents of plains.
The soils are mostly red and sandy.
Medium black soils occur in Chittorgarh district and in Madhya Bharat Plateau.
A mosaic of red and black soil is fOWld in the Madhya Bharat Hits division.
The average rainfall is 35 inches, varying from 30 inches in the Rajasthan Hills
to 37 inches in Madhya Bharat Plateau. The average number of rainy days
varies from 34 in Rajasthan Hills to 44 in the Madhya llharat Hills.
Out
of 409 lakhs of acres, 235 fall in the Jight green belt and 174 fall in the brown
belt. Approximately 441akhs of people living in this sub-region are exposed to
the seasonal hazards of the brown belt.
The net area sown per capita is 144
cents against a topographically usable area of 276 cents. Double-crop and
23

CHAPTER 1-: THE LAND AND nm' PEOPLE-I951

iiTigation are relatively small (6'8 and 3'4 per cent respectively). There is
very little fbrest. The unused land ratio is somewhat on the high side (25' 5

per cent).
The sub-region is fairly rich in minerals.
There are deposits of mica,
lead, zinc, copper, sandstone and other building stones, fire clays and glass
sands.
India's principal deposits of lead and zinc are found in Zawar in
Udaipur (Mewar). Production started during the war; was subsequently
discontinued, and recently re-commenced on a small scale. The sub-region
yields 10 per cent of the total annual output of Indian mica .

. 35. NORTII CENTRAL HILLS AND PLATEAU- This sub-region is made up of
five districts oiUnar Pradesh Ohansi, Jalaun, Hr.mirpur, B[mda, and .Mirzapur),
Vindhya Pradesh, Bhopal and seven north-western districts of Madhya Pradesh
(Mandla, Sagar, Jabalpur, Hcshangabad, Nimar, Betul and Chhindwara).
One hundred and thirty-eight lakhs of people live on 537 lakhs of acres, with a
land area per capita of 389 cents. The sub-region is traversed by a number of
ranges running from south-west to north-east. In general, the higher elevation
is found 'in the south; and the land slopes gradually towards the north. The
coinposition of the land area per capita is 226 cents of plateau-land, 70 cents of
hills and 93 cents of plains, yielding a topographically usable area of 276 cents.
There is a considerable area of black cotton soils in this sub-region. .Mixed
red and black soils and red lateritic loams occur in Vindhya Pradesh and Bhopal.
. The rainfall conditions arc distinctly better than in the North-West Hills.
The general average is 44 inches ranging from 36 in the Uttar Pradesh districts
to '48 inches in North-West Madhya Pradesh and 49 inches in Bhopal. Out
of 537 lakhs of acres, 396 lakhs fall in the light green belt and 131 ltikhs in the
dark .green belt. Only a small fringe of the land falls in the brown belt.
. The net area sown per. capita is 129 cents against the topographically usable
area of 215 cents. Double-crop is 10' 8 per cent and irrigation 5 per cent. Fallow
land is 18' 8 per cent.. There are extensive forests- lor lakhs of acres
out of a dl:Bsified total' of 526 lakhs of acres.
The ratio of classified forests
to total land area is large; the sub-region ranks third highest in this respect
(Malabar-Konkan and the North-East Plateau alone ranking higher). The
ratio ofun used land is distinctly high, viz., 28' I per cent (in fact, the sccr:nd
highest in Ii1(lia- the Eastern Himalayan sub-region ranking first). In view of
these·facts it is reasonable to suppose that the sub-region contains reserves of
CUltivable but uncultivated land, in a sense in which it cannot be said of
any of the sub-regions considered so far, except the Eastern Himalayas.' The
sub:.:.region is also definitely rich in mineral resources. Deposits of coal,
24'

LOW DENSITY SUB-REGIONS

manganese, graphite and fire clays arc found in North-West Madhya Pradesh.
Coal (in the Pench Valley field) and manganese (in the Chhindwara district)
are the principal minerals which are worked in fair quantities. Coal is aL')o
produced in the Vindhya Pradesh division of this sub-region, where limestone
is also workt:d tor the manufacture of cement. Small quantities of diamonds are
also found here. Deposits of bauxite are known to exist but are not worked. In
the Uttar Pradesh districts of this sub-region, glass sands are worked and. form
the basis of the glass industry of that state. Limestone is also worked for the
manufacture of cement.

36. NORTH-EAST PLATEAU- We now come to the last of our six low
density sub-regIOns. This is made up of three parts: the Chhota 'Nagpur
division of Bihar; the whole of Orissa except four districts (Balasorc~ Cunack,
Puri and Ganjam Agency) ; and East 11.adhya Pradesh (that is to say, the dis""'
tricts of Balaghat, Bhandara, Chanda, Raipur, Bilaspur, Durg, Bastar, Raigarh
and Surguja). Two hundred and ninety lakhs of people live on 9671akhs of acres,
with a land area per capita of 333 cents.
The Maikal range of the great Central
Indian divide, runs through the north-western part of this SUb-region. The
range is continued north-eastwards as Korea hills and the divide ends at tl}.e
Parcshnath hills in Chhota Nagpur.
The plateau lies generally at a high
elcvation in the north, the height being about 2,000-4,000 feet above sea level.
From the north the area generally slopes southwards or south-eastwards. The
remaining portion of the sub-region is at a height of about 500-1,500 feet above
sea level. The composition of the land area per capita is, therefore, 125 cents of
plateau-land, 110 cents of hills and 97 cents of plains, yielding a topographically
usable area of 215 cents.
In Chhota Nagpur the soils vary from red gravelly ferruginous to loams and
clays. In East A1.2.dLsa PradcEh the soils are for the greater part typical black
cotton type.
Red yellow type recurs at the eastern end. The soils of the
inland districts cf Orissa are mostly red earths with an occasional mixture of
lateritic and black soils.
Rainfall conditions are much bener here than even in the North Central Hills
and Plateat's. The annual average is 56 inches ranging from 54 in Chhota
Nagpur to 59 in Orissa Inland. The average number of rainy days varies from
63 in East Madhya Pradesh to 75 in Orissa Inland. Most pans of the subregion fall in the dark green belt and a relatively small area in the light green belt.
The net area so\\n per capita is 94 cents as against 2 I 5 cents which are topographically usable. Double-crop is 14·4 per cent and irrigation 10·8 per cent.
Fallow land is slightly on the high side (22·7 per cent). Out of the total area of 952

lS

CHAPTER I: THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE-I951

lakhs of acres, village records are available for 771 lakhs of acres. They show
that nearly 240 lakhs of acres are classified as forest. This is the largest area
in any sub-region of India. The proportion of clas~ified forests to total land area
is also high, being in fact the second highest in India (Malabar-Konkan is first).
The unused land ratio is 23·3 per cent. These figures indicate that there is
probably still some reserve of cultivable but uncultivated land.
This sub-regicn is distinguished from all others by its abundance of mineral
wealth. One of the three divisions of this sub-region- Chhota Nagpurproduces 82 per cent of India's coal; 57 per cent of India's mica; 46 per cent of
Inrlia's iron ore; the entire output of India's copper ore; and fairly significant
quantities of manganese, graphite, baUXite, lirr.estcne and other minerals.
Another division- East Madhya l)n:.desh- pHlduces 46 per cent of India's
It is also known to have
manganese and a little over 4 per cmt of India's coal.
large deposits of jron ore and some bauxite, but these are not worked. A third
division of this sub-region- Orissa Inland- produces over one-half of India's
iron ore, one-sixth of India's manganese and some coal also.

37. ALL SIX SUB-REGIONS- We rr_ay now cGnsidcf all the six low
density sub-regions together and compare the conditions prevailing in that
group with those of the country as a whole. The results are as follows:
1- The total populatiC'n of the six s uc-regions is 792 lakhs against India's
3,613 (21·9 per cent). The land area is, however, 3,92 I lakhs of acres
against India's 8,126 (48.3 per cent). The land area per capita is
495 against India's 225.
11- The topographical conditions which define the usabiJity ofland for
cultivation purposes are dissimilar in the different sub-regions.
One sub-region where topography is eminently favourable is largely
unusable because of the desert.
TABLE 8
A heavy write-off is necessary in
Percentage of cotal
two others on account of mounland area
tains. The other three arc mainly
plateau-land with a considerable
Law density
Topographical
sub-regions
components
India
proportion of hilly tracts. The
topographical components of land
Plains
43
area per capita are compared in
Plateaus .
28
Hills.
18
TABLE 8. Out of the total land
Mountains
22
II
area per capita of 495 cents the
topogrphically
usable area per
100
100
capita is 235 cents (including Jammu

Low DENSITY SUB-REGIONS

and Kashmir). The write-off is 53 per cent against India's
34 per cent. On balance, it is clear that the topographical
conditions are definitely less favourable.
IlI-- The distribution of land among the different rainfall belts in these
six sub-regions compares with Inrua as shown in TABLE 9·
On the whole, it seems that rainfall conditions are somewhat more
favourable here than in the country as a whole. The blue belt and
the dark green telt are distinct ly
T ABLE
9
larger but this might not make
------------------------------------------Percentage of total
much diffL'Tcnce, for where the
land area
rain falls copiously, suitable land i~
Z;;;;;"dcnsity A...
difficult to find. The topographicnl
Rainfall belt
sub-regions
India
write-off is heavy.
There i!\ ~
-B-'-uc-'-bc-'l-t-.---------------------]-6-------1-1--- small deficit of 5 per cent in the
33
21
light green belt but this is offset
Dark grecn bclt
Light green belt
32
37
by a substantial drop in the
Brown belt
7
24
brown belt.
It is this which
Ye ll(lw belt
12
7
indicates that these sub-regions are
certainly not worse off and probably
100
100
slightly better off as regards
rainfall than the country as a whole. [The yellow belt ic;; slightly
large, but the effect of this factor has already been taken into account
when the w(.'rst part of the desert was omitted from the reckoning.]
IV- The net area sown per capila is 96 cents as against India's 79
cents. It is difficult to say whether the advantage of the larger area
is or is not offset by somewhat lower average of soil quality. It is
probable there is some offsening, but it is not complete. The
comparative figures of land use are shown below:
TABLE 10

Low density
Indices of land use
{

Peroentage of net ,,<8 sown to totall.nd are'
Percentage of net area sown to topographically
usable area
..
"
.
.'
3. Double-·crop percentage.
.
.
.
4. Irrigation percentage
.
.
.
.
I.

sub-rl'.Cjons

India

19

35

40

56

12
10

16

2.2

22

2.

A

{

B

Fallow percentage.
.
.
Percentage of classified land of2.
Forests..
.
.".
.
3. Ocher land 'unavailable for cultivation'
4. Unused land
l.

13

22

1

r6

16
17

27

5
~7

CHAPTER I: THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE-I951

It should be noted particularly that the proportion of net area sown to
the topographically usable area is significantly smaller and the unused
land ratio is significantly higher. From this it would follow that
the low density is not entirely a matter of the available resources
being peorer.
Such a statement would be certainly true of the
Desert, probably also of the North-West H.ills and possibly the
Western H.imalayas. The Eastern Himalayas, the North-East
Plateau and the North Central Hills and Plateau sub-regions fall
in a different category. It seems probable, as already n:enticncd,
that they contain some reserve of cultivable but uncultivated land.
What is perhaps even more significant is the fact that these wbregions and more especially the last two among them possess mineral
resources c{ a distinctly higher range and \'alue than anywhere else in
India. . Tcday, that fact seems to have very little influence on the
relative distribution of people on the land. But it might well
make a difference in the future, when the possibilities of industrial
development -- so clearly indicated by these resourccs- are more fully
utilised.

E~ Medium Density Sub-Regionl

IN THE LAST two sections, we have completed the review of I I out of IS
sub-regions of India. The other four sub-regions arc shown in the table below
together with particulars of their populaticn, land area and land area per capita
TABLE II

Density
Population
Name of sub-region

Land area Land area
per capita

(IN LAKHS

OF ACRES) (IN CE.NTS)

Trans-Gangc~ic Pbins

259

332

499

South Deccan
North Deccan
Gujrat-Kathiawar

31 5

247

81 7

239
161

246
226

621
456

193
259
260
283

974

260

2,393

246

TOTAL 4 SUB· REGIONS

28

(IN LAKHS)

(NUMBER
PER
SQ. MILE)

MtbtUM t>ENSItV Stffl-REGtoNS

39. TRANS-GANGETIC PLAINS- This sub-region consists ot (i) the whole
of the Punjab except the two Himalayan districts (Kangra and' Simla) ;
Cii) the Patiala and East Punjab States Union; (iii) Delhi; (iv) three lowland
districts of Madhya Bharat (Bhind, Gird, Morena) ; (v) eight eastern districts of
Rajasthan (Jaipur, Tonk, Sawai Madhopur, Bharatpur, Alwar, Sikar, Bhilwara,
Jhunjhunu), and (vi) Ajmer. Two hundred and fifty-nine lakhs of people live
here on 499 lakhs of acres with a land area per capita of 193 cents. The entire
sub-region lies between about 600-1,500 feet above sea level except in the southwest where a part of the Aravalli ranges enters into Ajmer division. ' The
composition of the land area per capita is, therefore, 124 cents of plains, 61 cents
of :plateaus and 8 cents of hills, yielding 110 cents as the topographically usable
area. The Punjab Plain consists mostly of alluvium of the same origin as in
the Gangetic plains, generally sandy loam. Mixture of alluvial and aeolian soils
cover Delhi, East Rajasthan, Patiala and East Punjab States Union and the lowland districts of Madhya Bharat. To the scuth and east of Jaipur, th~ soils are
either black cotton or a rich alJuvialloam. In Ajmer the soils are mostly sandy.
We have already seen how average annual rainfall diminishes sharply
we move westward up the Gangetic plains. When we reach the Trans-Gangetic
Plain the amount becomes quite small. The average ranges from 19 inches in
Patiala and East Punjab States Union to 28 inches in Madhya Bharat Lowland
The average number of rainy days ranges from 26 in Ajmer to 36 in Madhya
Bbarat Lowland. Out of a total of 499 lakhs of acres, only 26 lakhs lie in the
light green belt. Four hundred and twelve lakhs of acres lie in the brown
belt and 61 lakhs in the yellow belt. A large part of the sub-region is, therefore."
exposed to the hazards of drought.
Part of the affected area is, however,
protected by irrigation.

as

The net area sown per capita is 95 cents against the topographically usable
area of IIO cents. Double-crop is fairly high (19 per cent) and irrigation is
distinctly high (28 per cent). [The sub-region ranks third highest in India in
the ratio of irrigated acreage to the gross sown area.] Fallow.land is 'on the
low side (15'8 per cent). Forest land is negligible. The unused land ratio ...ij
distinctly small (13'9 per cent).

As in the Gangetic plains, mineral resources are unimportant. Some limestone is produced in the foot hills of the Himalayas and there is some mica
production in Ajmer.
40 . SOUTH DECCAN- This sub-region consists of four divisions); viz.,
Mysore, Madras Deccan, South Hyderabad, and Bombay DeccanSouthem.
The Madras districts are: Bel1ary, Anantapur, Cuddapah, and KumooL T-he

29

titAPtER i: THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE-i9Si
Bombay districts are: Belgaum, Bijapur and Dharwar. All the districts of
Hyderabad except Aurangabad, Parbhani, Nanded, Bidar, Boo and Osmanabad, are included. The general elevation of the sub-region is 1,000-3,000 feet in
the north and 2,000-3,000 feet in the south, with a gentle slope towards the
east. Three hundred and fifteen lakhs of people live on 817 lakhs of acres with a
a land area of 259 cents per capita. The composition oftbis area is 175 cents of
plateaus, 41 cents of hills and 43 cents of plains- thus yielding 183 cents as the
topographically usable area.
In the districts of South Hyderabad and Bombay Deccan Southern the
land is covered by medium black soils, red loams and lateritic soils. In Mysore,
the soils are predominantly red sand loam type. In the four districts of Madras
Deccan, black cotton soils are associated with red loams and sandy loams.
The average rainfall is 32 inches ranging from 24 inches in the Madras
Deccan to 35 inches in Hyderabad and 36 inches in Mysore. The average
number of rainy days is 39 in Madras Deccan and 56 in Mysore. Approximately
277 lakhs of acres out of 817 fall in the light green belt. Nearly twice that
area or 520 lakhs of acres fall in the brown belt. Some parts of the areanotably the districts of Madras and Bombay-- are especially exposed to the
hazards of drought. Rainfall is not only scanty but capricious; and, in consequence, severe scarcities and famines occur, not merely frequently, but more or
less regularly.
The net area sown per capita is II4 cents against 183 cents which are topographically usable. Double-crop is almost negligible (2·7 per cent) and
irrigation is relatively small (8·9 per cent). The fallow percentage is high (34' 7
per cent). A fair amount ofland is classed as forest- 123 lakhs of acres out of
classified total of 806 lakhs. This might be one reason why the unused land
ratio is very small (6' 6 per cent).
This sub-region is fairly important for its mineral resources. Coal is
produced in South Hyderabad (3' 6 per cent of India's output). The entire
output of Indian gold is produced in Mysore. Mysore has fairly large
deposits of high quality iron ore but production is small because there is no coal
field in the vicinity. Magnesite and chromite arc other minerals produced
in Mysor~.
Manganese is worked in Madras Deccan. Iron ore, limestone,
gold and asbestos are known to exist in this area, though not worked. Small
quantities of bauxite are produced in Bombay Deccan Southern division.
41. NORTH-DECCAN- There are three divisions in this sub-region, viz.,
South-West Madhya Pradesh, North Hyderabad and Bombay Deccan Northern.
Amraoti, Buldana, Akola, Yeotmal, Wardha and Nagpur are the Madhya

30

MEbtUM DENsIty SUB-REGto~S

Pradesh districts.
West Khandesh, East Khandesh, Dangs, Nasik, Ahmednagar, Poona, Satara North, Satara South, Kolhapur and Sholapur are the Bombay
districts. Aurangabad, Parbhani, Nanded, Bidar, Brur and Osmanabad are the
Hyderabad districts. Two hundred and thirty-nine lakhs of people live on 621
lakhs of acres with an average land area per capita of 260 cents. The sub-region
is bounded on the north by the Satpuras and on the west by the Western Ghats.
The land generally slopes from west to east except in the north where the river
Tapti, flowing westward, enters the Arabian Sea. The land area per capita is
composed of 184 cents of plateaus, 46 cents of hills and 30 cents of plains,
yielding 214 cents as topographically usable area.
Heavy black cotton soils occur in South-West Madhya Pradesh and North
Hyderabad, The rest of the sub-region contains medium black soils with a
fairly considerable area carrying red loam (lateritic) soils. Except in the narrow
strip near the ghats, the major portion of this sub-region lies in the rain shadow
of the Western Ghats, and the rainfall is therefore low, The general rainfall is
36 inches and varies from 30 inches to 37 inches in Bombay Deccan Northern.
The average number of rainy days ranges from 44 to 50. Approximately 303
lakhs of acres out of 621 lakhs fall in the light green belt and 275 lakhs fall in
the brown belt. This part of the sub-region is exposed to hazards of drought,
though not so severely as parts of South Deccan.
The net area sown per capita is 157 cents as against 214 cents of to pographically usable area. Double-crop is negligible (1' 9 per cent) and the irrigation
percentage is exceedingly smaJI (4'2). Fallow land is 25 per cent. The forest
area is small and the unused land ratio is extraordinarily small (2.6 per cent, which
is the lowest ratio among all the sub-regions in India),
This sub-region is perhaps the poorest in mineral resources- poorer even
than the Northern Plains. This is because the sub-region is covered, for the
most part, by volcanic lavas.
Situated just outside the lava tracts, there is a
manganese field in Nagpur district of Madhya Pradesh, which is an outlier of
the main fields of Balaghat and Bhandara districts to the east,
42, GUJRAT-KATHIAWAR- This sub-region consists of Kutch, Saurashtra
and the districts of Bombay to the north of the Daman Ganga river (viz" Banaskantha, Sabarkantha, Mehsana, Ahmedabad, Kaira, Panch Mahals, Baroda,
Broach, Surat and Amreli). The north-eastern tracts of the sub-region consist
of portions of the Satpuras, the Vindhyas and the Gujrat-Malwa hill ranges,
They focus the drainage of the eastern part of this sub-region on to the Gulf of
Cambay by a fan of major rivers of which the most famous are the Narbada
and the Tapti, One hundred and sixty-one h:khs of people live here on 4561~

31

tUAPtER t: 11tE LANb AND TltE P£oP1..~-195t

of acres of land with a land area per capita of 283 cents. This is composed of
255 cents of plains, 27 cents of hills and one cent of plateau. The plains, ,how'ever, include 75 lakhs of acres of purely nominal land, mostly marshy wastes
'which includes 59 Jakhs of acres in the Rann of Kutch. If this is alm written
off along with the normal percentages of the different topographical ccmponents, the topographically usable area per capita is 207 cents.
The sub-region consists of deep black and medium black and alluvial soils.
Patches of mixed red and black soils and lateritics also occur. Ninety per cent of
the rainfall occurs during the monsoon season- June to September. The
southern Gujrat plain and the Tapti Valley receive a moderate rainfall of 30 inches
to 40 in<;hcs, which increases further towards the Satpuras and the north-eastern
highlands. Further north in Gujrat, there is a steady decline from 40 inches
to 25 inches.
There is a steep fall along the Saurashtra coast; and Kutch is
semi-desert. The sub-region enjoys a curious distinction. It is the only subregion which has some part of its land in all the five rainfall belts. The total land
area (456 lakhs of acres) is distributed as follows: blue belt (4), dark green
belt (17), light green belt (107), brown belt (247), and the yellow belt (81).
The net area sown per capita is 129 cents against the topographically usable
area of 207 cents. Double-crop and irrigation are ve.ry small (3' 7 per cent
and 3·9 per cent respectively). Fallow land is 20· 5 per ctnt. l~'orests are
negligible. The lU1used hmd ratio is much the same as in the Upper G~l11getic
..Plains (14· 5 per cent).
Manganese is worked in the Panch Mahals district of Bombay. Other
minerals known in the sub-region are gypsum, bauxite and limestone. Salt
is made all along the coast, and the output is very large, nearly one-half of the
total production of the country.
43. ALL FOUR SUB-REGIONS- Considering all four medium density subregions together, the results are as follows :
1- The total population of the four sub-regions is 974 lakhs against
India's 3,613 lakhs (or 27"0 per cent). The land area is 2,393 lakhs
of acres against India's 8,126 (or 29' 4 per cent). The land area per
capita is 246 cents against India's 225.
.
II,,_ TABLE 12 on opposite page compares the topographical components
of the land area per capita in these four sub-regions with those of the
country as a whole.

MEDIUM DENSITY SUB·REGIONS
TABLE 12

PerC8ntlll' of total

land area
TOptJpflllhiea/

Medium density

compottenlS

sub-regions

India

39

43
28

Plains
Plateaus .
Hills
Mountains

48
13

18

..

II

100

100

-

From the point of view of topography, the medium density
sub·reglons are perhaps slightly
better off than the country ~ a
whole. As compared with the total
land area of 246 cents, the "topographically usable area is. 174 cents.
The write-off is only 29 per cent
against 34 per cent for the 'country
as a whole.

111- But this advantage is heavily offset partly because the soil is, on the
average, poorer; and even more> because the rainfall is much more
unfavourable. This is seen from TABLE 13.
The brown belt dominates
Sixty·one per cent of the land in
Percentage of total
these four sub-regions falls in the
. land area
brown
belt, the· corresponding
.A.-~
Medium density
ratio for the country as a whole
Rainfall belts
sub-regions India
being only 25 per cent.
. I
Blue belt,
II
IV-- The net area sown per capita is
Dark green belt
21
2
122 cents out of a total land
Light green belt
30
37
area of 246 ·cents. In the
Brown belt
6r
24
Yellow belt
6
country as a whole the net
7
area sown per capita is only
roo
roo
79 cents against a total land
area of 225 cents. Quite clearly, there is not only no underutilization of land, there is clear evidence of excessive use. TABLE
14 on next page compares the main indices of land use as between
these four sub-regions jointly and the country as a whole.
TABLE 13

t .

CHAPTER I~ THE LAND· ANn·, THE P.iOPLE-I95I.
TABLE 14
~Medium

densit1
suiJrreg,ons

~ndia

. '{ I. 'Percentage of net area sown to total land area
•'
2. Percentage of net area sown to topographically

So

JS

A
. usable area
•..•.
, , . 3. Double-crop percentage.
.
.
.
•
,
4. Irrigation percentage
•
•
•
•
.

70

S6
·13

• Indices of land use

I, Failow percentage.

B
{

'.
•
•
•
Percentage of classified land of2.
Forests.
.
.
•
•.
3·
Other land 'unavailable for cultivation'
4"
Unused land.
•
•
••

6

.II

,16

26

22

II

IS
16
17

IS
8

. The figures converge and yield a coherent picture, which is that the
pressure of population on land is even greater ,on these medium density
sub-regions than in the high density sub-regions. Though the
rainfall is scanty) it is flot so small as to forbid cultivation altogether
as in the Desert. So, the people have settled and grown in numbers.
'But the capriciousness of the rainfall and other difficulties of
cultivation seem, on ly to provide the people with a strong
incentive for attempting cultivation over as large an area as
possible.
'
I, '
The fact that the fallow percentage is higher than the average for
India not only does not contradict these conclusions,. but rather
tends to confirm them. Extension of cultivation over sub-marginal
land of low productivity must necessarily entail a higher fa1l~w
percentage.

F - India and the World
in the last three sections how the distribution of the
people on the land- measured by our chosen index, the land area per capitavaries from one SUb-region to another. It stands to reason that there must be
a fairly close connection between the siZ<.~ of the index and the usefulness of land
to provide the food needed by the people who live on it. And we have found, by
reference to the simplest of known facts about the topography, nature of soil,
34
WE HAVE SEEN

INDIA AND THE WORLI)

the aDlOWlt of rainfall, .and the nature of land use- that the figures d() bang
together. Without attempting anything in the nature of' a mathematical oorrelation- and the data at our disposal are hardly suitable for that PUPQSewe can ~ve how in sOItle areas the people can and do live on less land per
bead than elseWhere.
45. We have indeed been led beyond this point to the conception of different·
degrees of utilisation of usable resources. We noticed the apparently ariamo10us
(but, neVertheless, credible) circumstance that the people living in the ~
medium density sub-regions with apparently more abundant land than in
the high density sub-regions have in fact had to contend agSinst greater diffi- ,
cuIties and exerted themselves more and achieved an even higher degree of
utilisation of usable land.
'.
At this stage, it is appropriate that we should carry our review from within
our country to the world as a whole, and attempt to form an idea of our
. own posi~ion in the distribution of humanity over the land area of the
world.
46. The following table shows the basic facts of comparison between
India and the World :
TABLE 15

India

World

36
81

240
3,251 .

All land

225

1,354

Agricultural area •

97

351

Arable land

97

126

Population (IN CRORES)
Land area (IN CRORES OF ACRES) •
Area per capita (IN CENTS) :

Humanity consists of not less than six and not more than seven persons for
every person living in India. But the total land area of all the countries of the
world is well over forty times as extensive as India. So, the land which would
fall to the share of each of us, if the entire world were evenly divided, would
measure 131/ :a acres- or an area which is six times as large as our own land area
per capita. In that event, would we be six times as well off as at present'? That'
se6ms"hardly likely, if we look at 'the figures 'of"agriculmral area' and IIlO11;

partiCularly ~arable land',

'

.

~.

CHAPTER I:

tilE LAND' AN]) THE PEOPLE-I95 t

.

47.. The foregoing figures have been taken from the YearBook of Food and:
Agricultural Statistics issued by the Food and Agriculture Organisation of>the.
United Nations. What is referred to here as 'arable land' should be deemed '
to include not only all land actually used for growing food or other crops,
(which is what we have hitherto considered as 'net area sown') but also fallow.:
lands.
, Agricultural area' according to these publications includes all such land and
in addition, what are called 'permanent meadows and pastures'. We have
apparently got no land of this distinctive description : our equivalent of such '
land is included within our total of 'net area sown' and 'fallow land'.
It appears that the average citizen of the world uses only a quarter of the land
on which he lives as 'agricultural area'; and he uses only about a third of this
agricultural area as crop-land and fallow. On the other hand, we use over twofifths of the entire land on which we live for 'agricultural' purposes and we cultivate almost all of it. In the result, the world citizen cultivates 126 cents against
our 97 cents. The difference between the areas which are cultivated is already
very much less than the difference between the areas which are available.
What is the explanation for this? One explanation may be that our land
area per capita includes a somewhat higher proportion of the more productive
land.
Another may be that we are over-crowded on too little land and are,
therefore, unable to pick and choose and have been already compelled to bring
under cultivation a good deal of poor land which the average world citizen leaves
waste or uses for rough grazing. It may be that the true explanation consists
in part of both.
Here we are faced wi~h m1.].ch the same questions with which we started when
we observed the ineqUality of distribution of people on the land in different
zones within India itself.

48. It is not very eaSy to answer the questions firmly, ·because we are even
less certain-about the relevant facts of other countries than we are of different
parts of our own.
So far as topography is concerned, it does not appear that the average
Indian citizen is better off than the average world citizen. It is reckoned that
the world consists of: 12 per cent of mountains, I4 per cent of bills, 33 per cent
of plateaus and 41 per cent of plains. Our country consists of : 11 per cent of
mOWltains,I8 per cent of hills, 28 per cent of plateaus and 43 per cent of plains.
The write-off, purely on account of topography, is much the same. It seems
likely, however, that the proportion of land which!1has to be written off as arid
or frozen land is somewhat smaller in India) than
the world ~ 8. whole. .

36:

in

iNDIA ANt> THE· woIUJ)

( '49. While we cannot be sure whether or not the average land of the world
is better or worse fitted for cultivation than our land, it is fairly cert~ that
the average land of Europe is definitely better fitted. Europe has fewer land·
forms· that curtail food production, than other continents. EW'Ope . has
also got 'the highest proportion of well-watered land'. Not only.is rainfall both
adequate and reliable, the rains are gentle and the temperatW'e moderatethe soils are not leached by heavy rains that wash out most of the fertility. The
table below shows the comparison between India and Europe :
TABLE 16

Europa
(EXCLUSIVE OF
EUROPJiAN

India
Population (IN CRORES).

U.S.S.R.)

39'6

.

Land area (IN CRORES OF ACRES)

121 '8

Area per capita (rN CENTS) :
All land

225

307

Agricultural area •

97

153

Arable land .

97

92

The figures of this table merit our very close attention. They show the
following:
First,- Europe (which is the most densely populated continent of the fJ)urld)
is less densely populated than India. The average European has more land per
capita than the average Indian- the excess held by the former is well over a
third of all the land held by the latter.
Secondly,- The average European has brought only 30 per cent of his land
under the plough. . The average Indian, on the other hand, has brought under
the plough 43 per cent of his land (even though it has a far larger proportion of
thin and poor soils, and a les.s adequate and less evenly distributed r~fall).
· Only thus is the average Indian able to get 97 cents of cultivated and fallow
· fields ,agaiIist 92 cents of the average Europe~.
.. • The exact proportion of Euiopeanland (,,,aunt/I oj European U.S.S.R. which should be claned .1
· plain or mountain is DOt clenrly known. If Buropean U.S.S.R. is also included, tWO-thirds of tbe
lad aurface has been
rec <oned as plldQl aQ,d .
only four .
pcrccllt as moul)tain ••
.

37

CHAPTER I:

tHE LAND AND ·THE PEOPLE-I951

Thirdly,- Because he has got· more and better land and has usea ,only a
S1IfGller frat:tion alit for culti'Dation, the aoerage European is able to Moe, and
does 'haw ,n addition, 61 cents of agricultural land under 'jJemfan8nt meadOtlJs
and pastures· .
.
These are important facts. They have a direct bearing on the issue much
debated these. days- whether the problem in India is one of 'over-population'
or 'under-development' ; and whether food is short because there is not enough
land or because; of the alleged 'inefficiency' and 'archaic methods' of Indian
farming. Whether or not the assumption be true that the methods of Indian
fanning are 'archaic' or 'inefficient', no such assumption is necessary for explaining
the difference in the nutritional standard of the average European and the average
Indian. Even in the absence of any difference in farming efficiency, Europe
can produce more plant food per capita than India because much the same area
of arable land per capita is available in Europe as in India but with more
favourable rainfall and soil conditions. In addition, Europe has got 'permanent meadows and pastures' which must' provide a supply of milk, milk
products, beef, mutton and other foodstuffs of animal origin-. for which there
can be no parallel in India. Thus out of his own resources, the average
European can produce not merely more food than the average Indian' (this he
needs, in any event, because of the climate) but also better food- richer, better
balanced, and more nutritious food. Actually, the average European consumes
more food than his land produces. He has IIUlIlageq to do this with the help
of overseas imports of food (of the order of about one-fifths of his total
,consumption).

50. This comparison between India and Europe (on this fundamental issue
~aftbe reJau9nship between the land and the people) is so important that we might

dwell a little longer on it and carry the analysis a stage further.
.
There are, of course, many countries
Europe; and conditions differ from
one to the other, in much the same way as we have seen that they differ from one
sub-regioo to another in India. We may institute a closer comparison between
India and Europe by considering groups of European countries which might
correspond to our high density sub-regions and low density sub-regions separately. The United Kingdom, Frana:, Gennany, Belgium, Netherlands and
·.Luxemburg form a group of European countries (call this GToup A)· which has
almost exactly the same population as our five high density sub-regions, viz., the
Lower Gangetic Plains, the Upper Gangetic Plajns, Malabar-Konkan, South
Mad.r~ and North Madras & Orissa Coastal.
Another group of Eur~
countries (let us call it Group B) consisting of Greece, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia,

in

J8

INDIA ~AND 11m WORLD'

Albania, Spain, Ireland, Norway, Sweden and Finland contain almost exactly the
same population as our six low density sub-regions, 'liz" the Desert,
Westem'HimalaYas',;Eastem Himalayas, North-West Hills, North Central Hills
Plateau, and North-East Plateau, The two sets of territories are compared
in the ta"le below. :
'TABLE It'·

High
deMIY

sub-regions
of India'

European
l4u
countn"es 'density
of
sub-regions. .
Group A
of India

European
coUntries
" of

Group B

Population (IN CRORES)

18' 5

Land area (I.N cRORES Of, ACRES)

17"9

23'9

All. land' .'

97

154

. Ap-icultural area.

59

127

101

700 .
257

Arable land

59

56

101

IlS

7'9

7"9

~9'2

55;'3-

Are,a per capita (IN CENTS) :

. ;.

The figures in this table show that all the conclusions which were drawn
in the last paragraph about Europe and India as a whole may be substantially
repeated with complete validity about each of the two groups of European countries and their counterpart sub-regions of India separately, In the face of these
figures there can be no reasonable doubt that, in relation to the natural resources
available for the production of food, India is even more heavily over-populated
than Europe.
51. We may now conclude this review with a brief glance at two great
countries- the United States of America and the Soviet Union- where the
relationship between the land and the people is incomparably more favourable.
The total number of people living in both these countries put together is slightly
smaller than the total number of the people of India. But the land area of these
two cOWltries is far more than nine times as large and not far short of ten times
as large as India. The basic facts of the comparison are given in TABLE 18
on next page.
(39

titAPTER I'! .Tim L1Jtt> ~i> TItE PEOPLE-19$t
'TABLE 18

Population (IN CRORES)

,

Land area (rN CRORBS OF ACRES),

India

U.S.A.

U.S.S,R,

36'1

IrI

19'4

81'3

190'5

j9Q'4

·Area per C;fpita (IN CENTS) :
All land

225

1,264

3,046

Agricultural area

97

741

448

. Arable land

97

302

287

. The figures tell their own story. It is true that the Soviet Union and even
the United States of America have a clearly larger proportion of arid and frozen
lands than Europe or even India. We have no information .of . a precise and
quantitative character which can help us to make the correct allowance for the
overall differences in topography, climate arid soil. Even so, the observed
differences in per capita availability of all land, agricultural area, and arable land
are so large that they cannot be attributed entirely or even in large measure to
soH differences. The outstanding fact must be recognised- the peoples of the
United States of America and Soviet Russia have at their disposal a definitely
larger share of the· usable land of the World than the peoples of Europe and
India.

CHAPTER II

The Pattern of Living-I 95 I
A - Villages and Towns

A

for the census count were made village by village and
town by town. We have thus got a count of all the different places where
people live, The total number of such places is 56r,r07- 558,089 villages and
3,018 towns, Out of3,569 lakhs of people whom we counted, 2,950 laths were
found in villages and 619 lakhs in towns,
RRANGEMENTS

2, Let us suppose that the entire country is divided by lines dr~wn fr<;m
north to south at regular intervals of five miles and by other lines drawn from
east to west similarly at regular intervals of five miles. Then, the entire territory over which the census was taken would be divided into 47,074 squares,
each of which will be five miles long and five miles broad, Let us refer to the
villages falling within each of these squares as a 'village group', We shall then
have 558,089 census villages combined into 47,074 'village groups', An average
Indian 'village group' will consist, in round figures, of a dozen villages, each with
rather more than 500 inhabitants, There will be rather more than six thousand
villagers in all in each 'village group'.

3. The following table shows how this pattern of 'village groups' differs in
different zones :
TABLE I

Average
number oj
viUagers
per village

Zone
North India
East India
South India ,
West India
,
Central India
North·West India .

.

INDIA

489
433

Yilla6es and villagers in an averag'
village group (25 SQ, MILES)
Number of
",1106es

Number"·
villt16tJrs

(ROUND PIGURE) (IN nIOUSANDS)

2S

12'2

18

.7'8

9

9'0

43 1

3'9

447·

7
9
8

52 9

12

6'3

1,052

708 .

S'O

3·'6

41

CIlAPTER II:

THE PATTERN OF LIVING-I951

Either the size of the village is
very large in some zones and very small in others ; or what is called a 'village'
means one thing in one zone and another thing in another zone. Let us look at
the figures of this table more clOf)tly~ . Th,e'figores in the last column are the most
straightforward. They show how many thousand villagers are likely to be found
in every 'village group';:+. the ~ginary squate, five miles long and five miles
broad. It is less than four thousand in North-West India and Central India,
while it is twelve thousand in Nort1~, J~~. The differences ~tween one
zone and another simply show that the villagers are more densely settled in one
zone t~ in another. The·figures of the last column yield no new informa_tion; .they thww up ill another f9rm, the familiar fact of unequal ~stribution of
'people. o~r ,the land (which has been thoroughly tmalysed in the last chapter) .
.,BtU there is one i,difference : .the Q.gures are limited to villagers. only, town dw~llers not being counted.
TABLE I

brings out a puzzling fact.

· '. The next question" is the meaning of ~he figures in the second and third
columns .. Why is it, that the average South Indian vlllage has such a. large
nwnber .of. people (1,052) ? After South India, West India stands out as the
zpne with large villages, while all other zones have villages wit4 average popula· tion ranging between four and five hundred people only. Is there a real ditfer· e~ce in the living pattern? Are the villagers ill some parts of the country more
.greg~ious than in other parts? Density of settlement and gregarious ,living
· '8!~ ~wQ quite different things., An area may be sparsely settled b\.Jt· the few
; pC()j)l~ in it ,m~'y he living together in a relatively small number of settlements
each with a relatively large number of people .. .Is th~s the kind of differepce
we .are ,observing when
we
look at the second
and third coiumns
I
.",.
.
~

•

I '

1•

.. •

of TABLE r? ..

.

- .. ,

......

'

.4~ It wO.uJd not be safe to read any snch meaning illto the figures, lllainly
because·,what is reckoned for. altadministrative purposes (and consequently also
for the"~~~SM)"~ ~.cvm~~' i't!~y or may not be the same as what we normally
have irl~ wpen we.w.eak~.Q!a vill.6ge. "A village in the latter sense, means or
shoulp
I. ~lusternf h~uses (fit'more than one closely adjojning duster
of hoUses)", wMse inhabitdnti are regarded by themselves as well as oy others as a
distinctiv~. 'soo al unit with: its identity marked by a distinctive local n$lle. The
village in t~e adminiStrative sense is th~' 'mauzti,'- a settled ar~ with defined
boundari~,ior which village records have. 'been prepar~d. In th~ Sottth, there is
a further '6evelopment b~ which contj~us administrative vil~ges.#~fined by
land recor'cIS have been grouped togethCr:'for purPoses of land
administration, alrd
the
group
is'referred
to
as:
the
'village'.
The'·variations
in the
. - ....
..

mean

'reverlue

.

·. nLt.ACES I AN1J) TOWNS

.figureS, ;tbbrefore, merely bring auf the differences in 'the ·delimitation 0 f
aclmiriistrative villages. This:does not,'of course, niean -that real differences in
the;,sooial unit- based on the: house-eluster and localname-:do not also exist.
They do. Thus, for instance, in Travancore-Cochin and West Madras where
.the average nwnber of inhabitants per village is perhaps the largest, the houseS
do not cluster at all. The 'village', .as:· it is ,understood· in the.eSt of India,
is scarcely to,be foood'there.

·'5.. Iri the Ught 'of this, explanati~n, it will be easier to. understand the _~aria~
dons in the size pattern between different zones, which is shown by the follow;ing table:
TABLE 2

Percentage of rural population Jiving in
Medium

Zone
North India
East India
South India
West India
Central India .
- North..West India

·IN'DIA

Sniall ,si3ed
Large
Very large
villages 'Villages
villages
'Villages
(UNDER 500) (5°0-2000) (2000-5000) (OVER 5000)

29'8
33'8
9'4
18'r
35'7
30 '4

55'0
50 '4
50 '9

26'S

48 : 8 .

13'5
14'3
35'3
23'9
13'0

55'3
48 '6
38 'S

16'4

1 '4
3'3
16'8
3'0
0'9
2'3,_

19'4

5'3

The table showS that the medium-sized vHlage- with inhabitants n~mbering
between 500 and 2,000- is the dominant type in a11 the six zones, :As .a' general
statement, ·this is perhaps. no .less true of the village-. in its natural se1lSet~an oft~e admini~'trative vil1~ge, on w~i:ch it is ,actually based,

,6•. The total number of peOple living in .ioWns, as mentioned already, is
619 lakhs; :a number which is _. larger than the entire' popUlation of Great
.Britain or; France, .. In terms,!however, of India's total of 3,569 bkhs; the mbah
-population. is relatively· smalh-- the all-India -percentage: is: 17 '3:- just aJitrle
more than one in six, The proportion varies £rOIll" zone ito zone" 'It is·,as high
'8$ 3J' 2 ~ cent in W~ India and ~ low as II ';Iin l¥lstInd~a.- T~ otht;r four

,zones, in O{Qer, , at;e : Norilrwe&t India (21' 4), ;S~1.lth I~cija ,(19'7), _9=n~r~d

-J1J)dill,(U,'$)i~dNQl't4, ~ia (~3;'6).· ,

,-. ,

,;' , .'

[' :

~, .L

'43

tEtAPTER II!

'tI!a PAtTIilN OF L1VING-J9St

. Witllin the zones, there are large variations from state to state and division. to
division. Thus Greater Calcutta is situated in East India- the zone with the
Smallest proportion of town-dwellers. The average for West Bengal Plain is as
high as 26' I, because of Greater Calcutta. But the zonal average is low
because it includes the very large population of Bihar (with only' 6' 7 per cent in
towns), Orissa (with 4' I per cent) and Assam (with 4'6 per cent). In West India,
on the other band, consistently high ratios are found in different parts of the
zone. The urban population ratio is 33' 7 per cent in Saurashtra 26' 5 per
cent and 26'2 per cent in the Northern and'Southem divisions of Bombay
Deccan and 25'6 per cent in Bombay Gujrat. 'Within the limits of one state
(Madhya Pradesh) , we have such large variations as 26' I per cent in the SouthWest Madhya Pradesh division, 15'3 per cent in the North-West Madhya
Pradesh division and 5'7 per cent in the East Madhya Pradesh division.
The growth of towns has largely depended, at any rate in the past, on the
accidents of history and geography. There is, therefore, no particular order
or system observable in their distribution.
7. Towns vary in number of inhabitants even more widely than villages

We may adopt a simple four-fold classification and refer to all towns with a
population of one lakh and over
as 'cities'; those with a population
range of 20,000 to a lakh as 'major
Number U7'ban
of
popula- towns', those with a population
·range of 5,000 to 20,000 as 'minor
Number tcmm
non
of
dwelk7's
pertowns', and those with a poputtntmS (IN LAKHS) centage
lation under 5,000 as 'townships'
235
38'0
Then, the pattern of India's
73
urban population is as shown

TABLE 3

Cities

MajortoWDS

186

M.iaor towns

30 'I

in TABLH 3.

8. The question arises"';" if
3' 3
there are 'very large villages'
619 100'0
with more than 5,000 inhabitants
in each, how are they distinguished
from minor to'WllS which might also have the same number and more
particularly, how are villages distinguished from the townships wbich have a
smaller population than even 5,000.
The answer is that a hard and fast line is very difficult . to draw. . Some
criteria were laid down and the towns were specified at· the early . censuses.
These aiteria are reapplied at every census and additions and alterations ve
Townshipa •

6Z2

20

c

VILLAGES AND TOWNS .

made to the lists of towns 'in each state. GeneraBy speaking, it is much more
oommon at each successive' rensus for villages to be reclassified as towns, than
the other way about,
.

9, The tests prescribed for distinguishing towns from villages in different
states are based on ideas common to all states, but they are not identical nor'
have they been applied with meticulous uniformity. Thus, Uttar Pradesh
classifies as a town: "(a) every Municipality, (b) every notified area, (c) every
town area, (tf) cantonment and (e) any other continuous group of houses
permanently inhabited by usually not less than 5,000 persons which (having
regard to the character of the population, the relative density of the dwellings,
the importance of the place as a centre of trade and its historic associations),
the State Superintendent of Census Operations decided to treat as a Census
Town". In West Bengal, the definition is somewhat stricter. There, a town
is: "(a) an area, irrespective of population, which has been declared by the
Government to be a municipality, and (b) where a municipality has not been
established and yet the Government decides to call it a town for the ensuing
census, if the area has satisfied the following tests ; (I) it has a population of
not less than 5,000, (it) a density of not less than 1,000 inhabitants to the
square mile, (t'it) the area has some importance as a centre of trade or distribution or administration, and (iv) about three-quarters of the adult male population are chiefly employed in pursuits other than agriculture". "The fundamental
criterion" in Madras is reported to be "the existence of urban features- which
can be judged by the way in which the houses are situated and how they have
been built and the availability of urban amenities (such as a bazar where one
could buy one's normal requirements throughout the year, facilities for education,
recreation and medical treatment)",
The percentage of urban population living in townships reflects, to some
extent, the differences in these definitions. It ranges from 6' 2 per cent in North
India to 1'3 per cent in East India. The other zones, in order, are: NorthWest India (5'9), Central India (4. 6), South India (2·0), and West India (1"9).
10, It is possible that places which would have been classified as villages
in one state may be classified as towns in others. But the proportion of the
urban population living in such places is very small. If we neglect the figures
for townships, there is little doubt, the numbers of minor towns, major towns and
cities and the statistics of inhabi tants. of such towns do present a comparable
picture of the pattern of urban life i~ ~fferent parts of India.
Minor towns, 88 mentioned already, account for 28' 6 per cent. of India's
population,_ They seeQl to ~ mO$t important in Central India (where

w-ban

4,.

CHAPTER II :; TBEfNT7ERJT sOF lLlVING-";£951

the:rati&lliis 35~3·per'cer1t.)and'leastan East.India{where the ratiO" is 19 '1 per
ccntj. The ratios 'in other zones, iq: ~order, are: South India' (31.5), West
India (30' I), North-West India (27'7), and North India (26' 4). The people
li,v~pg,in 48:5 majOl" towns and 13 ,cities '(who nllID:beF 421 lakhs) are siistributed
~ong th~ zones" ~ shown' below:'
'
.
4

TABLE 4

Zone

North Indla .

Cities

Major towns

Population
Number (IN LAms)

Population
Number (LN LAKHS)

14

33

62

24

13

46

82

34

South India .

IS

49

133

50

West India,

II

55

84

32

Central India

8

26

62

Z3

North-West India.

9

26

62

23

2~S

485

186

East India

INnlA

"

,"

-.

73

,_'

I I.' In Great Britain and other countries where the urban popUlation is far

more numerous than the ~ral population, towns have expanded So ¥Teatly that
they have joined up into contin~ous built-up areas with inhabitants ,munbering
arOI~. ' These gigantic house-clusters are . referre" to as 'conurbations'.
We have.oo such 'plates, But we do ha~e some towns Which adjojn oneariother'
SO clQSely,that it becomes somewhat artificial to ref~ to tp~ as seP~te towns:'·
Greater Calcutta is an outstanding instance. It cpqsists o.f ~ix cities (Calcutta,
Howr.ah, . T011yganj,. Bhatpara, Garden 'R~cll and South Suburbs), twentY-one major towns and eight ·minor towns. Delhi consists of twO ,cities; three
@f\jor .:tQwns and one, minor' to:wn, . There' ire' a nUmber of other inStances.
~ ~lng ba6 been made at this Census to locate sucb. ,pmcest nOme them:· ee

44,

,f;fOUSE~. ~D :lfOUSEHOLDS.

'~'lfPUPS',~ ~d :to, cpmpi1e ip.formatioQ.. about ~hem as·inhabited loqdities,·,
12. TABLE 5 shows the:ten'lal'gesf

,"(FABLE S

•" Populatiim
inhabited localities arranged in order.
,T«Bn group
(IN LAKHS)
of population (on the 'town· group':
-:'~'."-1-.'"':"'O-rCJ-,t-e-r-Oil-··....
cu-tt-a-.-----4-S-·7---: basis).
' " '!, '\ !
8
',1

~

~

1

.1'

.. %~

';.

•

•

I"

28~39

Greater Bombay '.

'3·' Madras "

14'16

, ;'4. Delhi .

. 13'84'
10·86
7' 94

.s· Hyderabad

6~ Ahmedabad.

7· Bangalore •
~. Kanpur.
.
9. Poona •
10.' Lucknow

7 :79
7 05

8

~:9~ .

TOTAL

It is worth noting that .'though:
there arc only 73 cities amC!ng~,o18'

total rtumhet of.
inhabitants of these dtles exceeds'
towns, the

one-third" of the,' total :, .Urb~·
population of India. ' Very' heatt{
one-tifth bf the" entire . city
population of Indhi 'is fOUnd'in"one'
inhabited locality, viz.~, Greater
Calcutta.

B '- Houses and households

begins as a census of hous~s. the pooplc,
know ~hat a census is ooming when an officer comes round to nu.mber 'the, houses.
Unfortunately however, it is not usualto organise the work as a census of ~ouses.
If this had been done, we might have had very useful information about the
houses themselves- with what materials they are built, the accomtn~dation
they provide, their sanitation, ventilation etc. All that we do have, at 'this
c~nsus'~s in previous censuses, is just the n\lIllber of 'occupied houses' among
those which 'were numbered at the' census. There were 644 lakhs of occupie<t
hQUseS- 541 lakhs jn villages and 103 lakhs in towns.
' "
,
'..
.
'1
14. That ~ves us almost exactly 6 persons to a hOilse in'townsi',and U
~fSQIlS.'for t~ h9UBeS in a village. ,A 'house' seems it simple en.oo.gh thing,
like a 'villag;e' or·a 'town'. But if we are to nuij{e serious use Qf BJatistics., we
hlJY.e to ,}le very precise, in. defining, o~: t~ .. J~t a& we: ~d t<:) enq~r~ :what
.a~)'illag~' w~ ~ what a. 'town': was;, ~ b.ave also lto as_k: ~~; we ..~..P8, a,
EVERY CENSUS of populatio~

' : '

,

'~~';t In. most ~- wher~,tht:re ~'only one .~\din~, ~ if:~'(~B~t;!1
Ry ppJY{9D~l~Y-:- t;hat building is the ha~,'~ jt: is~, ~ el\~. o(*~~,JD;!~4

411

!Nt>lA PICTURE

their absolute number js quite small. One might suppose that the
agriculturists in toWns must be non-cultivating landholders who live on
rent. This is not correct. As we shall see presently, the numPer of
agricultural rentiers living in villages as well as towns is a very much smaller
fraction of the total number of all agriculturists in the country. Cultivation i$
carried on in the periphery of all towns; Some cultivators and even cultivating
labourers live there. The proportion of such people is very small in the cities
and maJor towns, but is quite considerable in the minor towns and
townships.
6. Let us leave the non-agriculturists for a time, and follow up our 7 10
lakhs of agriculturists. They are divided into four classes as below:
TABLE 5
Percentage

Number
(iN LAKHS)

L1'velihood Class
r-Cultivators Qf land wholly or mainly
owned
n-Cultivators Qf land wholly or mainly
un-owned

.

,

III-Cultivating labourers

.

IV-Non-cultivating owners ofland ; and
other agricultural rent receivers
TOTAL

.

Percentage
of all

selfof all
agri'cul- supportin&
persons
wrists

457

64·4

43·8

88

12·3

8'4

149

21"0

14·3

16

:2.'3

1·6

710

100·0

68·1

The figures of this table bring out clearly the relative numerical importance
of the four classes into which agriculturists have been ruvided.
7. Among the four classes, Livelihood Class IV (whom we shall refer to as
'agricultural rentiers' for short) is numerically insignific,;ant. This class includes
two quite different types of people referred to as 'non-cuItivating owners.
of land' and 'other agricultural rent receivers'. In popular imagination, the.
proprietors of zamindaris and other estates come first. They are the people
referred to to as 'other agricultural rent receivers'. This is a better
description of such people than 'non-cultivating owners of land'- because their
legal rights over the whole or greater part of the cultivated land in the estate are
strictly limited to the receipt of a rent (which may not
changed except by
93

be

HOUSES AND HOUSEHOLDS

data--though collected on the all-India basis-were not compiled. In view of
this snd the difficulty already mentioned about West Bengal's definition of a
'house', the figures for Ea India are not referred to in this section for purposes
of comparison with other zones.
16. Houses and households- There arc, to begin with, 112 households in
every 100 hou;:;es of a typical Indian village and 124 households in every 100
houses of a typical Indian town. Familie~ occupying the same house but living
and messing separately in different parts of that house (which are not struc~
turally separated from one another and provided with separate main entrances)
are thus more common in the town than in the village- the difference being
represented by 12 per cent in the village and 24 per cent in the town.

17. Number of persons in households- In every hWldred households in the
village there are 491 persons; in every hundred households in the town, the
number is 471. The difference, though small, is probably not insignificant.
18. Number of persons in houses- If we combine the two foregoing sets
of data it may be infr~rred that in every hWldred houses in a vHlage 550 people
must be living, while in every hundred houses of a town 584 people must be
living. These figures arc somewhat smaller than one would get if the entire
rural population of 2,950 lakhs and the entire urban popUlation of 619 lakhs
were divided up among the occupied houses mentioned in para 12 (viz., 541
lakhs of houses in vmages and 103 lakhs of houses in towns). There are two
reasons for this. One is that the household data are based on a sample and a
sampling error is unavoidable. Another (and probably the more important)
reason is that the sample household data are exclusive of people living in boarding houses, hostels, hospitals, jails and other institutions as well as of people
living in camps, members of wandering tribes and other homeless persons.
19. Males and females- Out of 491 people in every hundred nu-a! households, 252 are males and 239 are females-there is a male excess numbering
13

in

100

households.

Out of 471 people in every hundred urban households, 248 are males and
223 are femalcs- there is a male excess numbering 25 in 100 households.
It should be noted that there is a male ex~ss both in the village and in the
town; the excess is, however, larger in the t()WIl than in the village_

Types of households (differentialed by size)-" Let us refer to a household
whi~ has three members or less as a 's tn ~ 11' household~ one which has 4 or
20.

49

CHAPTER II:

THE PATTERN OF LIVlNG-I95I

S or 6 members, as a em e diu m' household; one which has 7, 8 or 9.
members, as a '1 a r g e' household;
TABLE

6

and one which has 10 or more
members, as a' v e r y 1 a r g e '
Number of
household. How many households
households in a
of each type would be found
Type of
Typical
Typical
among 100 households is shown
househDld
'l:illage
town
in TABLE 6 separately for the
typical village and typical town.
Small
33
Medium .
Of
the four types, medium
41
44
Large
16
households are most numerous,
17
Very large
6
which is what one would expect.
5
That 'very large' households with
TOTAL
100
100
10 or more members number
Only about one in sixteen is also not unexpected. But it seems a little surprising
that every third household in a village should be a 'small household' with three
members or less. Such a large proportion of small households is a prima facie
indication that families do not continue to be 'joint' according to the tradtitional
custom of the country and the habit of breaking away from the joint family and
Setting up separate households is quite strong. Unfortunately we do not have
Similar information for past censuses. So, we cannot say whether th~ per
centage of ' small households' has or has not been increasing and we cannot
measure the differences in the rate of change in different parts of the country.
Information has been collected and compiled about the pattern of
household relationship. This is available for households in general- but not
separately for rural and urban households. If we consider 100 households
(taken proportionately from villages as well as towns) there are 487 persons in
them and their household relationship is as shown below:
21.

TABLE

7
Number in
100 households

Household relations,"p
Heads of households : {

A
{

Male (married) .
Male (widowers)

Females.
Wives of heads of households.

•

•
•

· 71

•

19

•

10

•

71
171

so

HOUSES AND HOUSEHOLDS

concluded

TABLE 7 -

Number in
100 households

Hou5ehold relationship
Sons of heads of households

.

• 108

B { Daughters of heads of households

( Male relatives of hcads of households (othcl than sons)

•

. 48

.

C ~

L Female relatives of heads of households (other than daughters)

81

.

72.
120

D -

Persons unrelated to the head of the household: {Males.
Females.

4
3

7

So much for the India pattern. We may now consider the variations
of this pattern in different zones fix which comparison is possible. The total
number of households living in every 100 houses of a village varies from 108
in West India to 1I8 in North India. The intermediate figures are 109 in
Central India, I I I in South India and 113 in North-West India.
22.

In every zone, the number of households per 100 houses is larger in the
town than in the Village. The excess is almost negligible in North-West India.
In other zones it ranges from 5 per 100 houses in Central India to 10 in West
India, 13 in North India and 24 in South India.
23. The total number of members of 100 rural households ranges from
473 jn Central India to 5II in North-West India as well as North India. It
is 483 in South India and 500 in West India. There is practically no difference
in the number of members of rural households and urban households in South
India. In other zones the number is smaller in urban households.

24. There is an excess of males over females both in the village and the

town in every zone. The difference is negligible in South India, but very
conspicuous in North-West India and North India. The excess is

Sl

CHAPTER II:

TRE PAT'ffiRN OF LIVING-I951

larger in the towns than in the villages, in all zones exee pt one.
are shown in TABLE 8 below

The figure

25. TABLE 9 at the bettom
shows the size-pattern of rural and
Excess of males over
urban households in different
females in
zones. We have noted already
100 Rural
100 Urban
that the size pattern of rural as
Zone
households
households
well
as
urban
households
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - presented two main features
North India
27
46
7
in the country as a whole.
I
South India
38
First,- medium households (with
West India
4
Central India
21
4, 5 or 6 members) are the domi9
North-West India
18
29
nant type; and Secondly,- small
households (with 3 members or
INDIA
13
25
less) are more numerous than
large ~md very large households
with 7 or more members. This table shows that these two generalisations
are true of every zone. A review 0f data relating to the states and
divisions of a state within each zone shows that these features are observable
everywhere except in six divisions, viz., West Madras, Travancore-Cochin,
Coorg, Vindhya Pradesh, Patiala & East Punjab States Union and Sikkim. It
is only in the rural areas of these six divisions that one finds the small household to be less numerous than large and very large households.
TABLE 8

TABLE 9

100 Rural households
.-A.. _ _ _

r-

52

~

Medium
Very
Large large

100 Urban households

r-----A..-----,
Medium

Very
Large large

Zone

Small

North India

33

44

17

6

41

38

15

6

South India

34

44

17

5

34

44

17

5

West India

31

45

18

6

38

40

16

6

Central India .

36

44

IS

5

40

38

16

6

North·West India

31

44

19

6

38

41

16

5

Small

:ttottsEs AND HOUSEltoLDS
~6. Heads of households and their flJ'iVe3- The total number per 100 housl!-

holds varies from 167 in North India to 176 in Central India. For other zones,
the figures are 170 in North-West India and West India and 175 in South India.
We may deduce from these figures that the number of widowers who are heads
of households must be 33 in North India, 30 in North-West India and West
India, 29 in South India and 25 in Central India.
Female head'i of households are fewest in North India and Central India
(7 per hundred households) and largest in South India (14). Other figures
are: 8 in North-West India and II in West India.

27. Sons and daughters of heads of households- The total number of sons
in 100 households varies from [03 in Central India to 1I6 in North-West
India. In other zones the number is : 105 in North India, 110 in West India
and I I I in South India.
Sons outnumber daughters in every zone. The difference is largest (34)
in North-West India and North India and smallest (22) in South India. The
differences in the other zones are: 30 in West India and 28 in Central India.

28. Persons related to the head of the household (other than sons and daughters)
- The total number of such persons in 100 households is largest in North India
(137) and smallest in South India (109). Elsewhere, it ranges as follows: 132
in North-West India, and II9 in West India and Central India.
In every zone, female relatives (other than daughters) outnumber the male
relatives (other than sons).

29. Persons unrelated to the head of the household- The number per 100
households is smallest in North-West India (l), and largest in North India (13).
For other zones the figures are: 7 in West India, 5 in South India and 4 in
Central India.

30. This completes our accowlt of the internal structure of the household
based on a very brief review of sample households as recorded in the National
Register of Citizens. It should be emphasized that the figures given in this
Section are baSed on sample households taken from the National Register of
Citizens and that there are no similar figures of prior censuses with which to
compare them. They give a broad picture which is probably reliable. Much
closer study, supplemented by local enquiries, is necessary before one can
analyse the similarities and differences disclosed by this review and correlate

53

CHAPTER If:

THE PATTERN OF LIVING-):951

them with the similarities and differences independently ascertained to exist in
~espect of social habits and customs in different parts of the country. Only
then we shall be able to appreciate the full significance of the data and form
a clear mental picture of the pattern of household life in all parts
of the country.

C - Sex Ratio
IT IS PERHAPS natural that people should expect to find that males and
females are equal in number everywhere and at all times. Some surpri~e is
always expressed when the census figures show the contrary. The census
figures show not only that males and females are unequal in numbers but also
that the magnitude of this inequality is also different in different parts of the
country. The difference between the numbers of the two sexes is negligible
or relatively small in some parts of the country and quite substantial in ot hers
The difference tende; to get larger from one census to another at some places;
it tends to get smaller elsewhere.

32. It is usual to measure the difference in numbers between the sexes by
an index number called the sex ratio.

In the United Kingdom 'the number
of females per 1000 males' is used as the index number. In the United States of
America 'the number of males per hundred females' is used for the same
purpose. The Census of India is used to the former and we shall therefore
refer to the 'number of females per 1000 males' as the sex ratio.
33. In the country as a whole, the sex ratio was 947- according to the
1951 Census. It varied widely among the zones. The lowest value was 883
in North-West India. The highest value was 999 in South India where practical
equality of the sexes was attained. The other four zones varied thus: 910 in
North India, 938 in West India) 945 in East India and 973 in Central India.
34. The sex ratio was found to be Jess than 1000 in every division of North
India and North-West India without any exception. In the other four zones,
it is possible to locate divisions where the females outnumber males. Such
divisions are specified in TABLE 10 on opposite page, together with their
sex ratio.

54

SEX RATIO
TABU 10

Zone
EAST INDIA

Femalaper
1000 ttUJlef

Natural division
()rissa (Joastal

1040

Manipur

1036

North Bihar Plain

.

()rissa Inland
Soum INDIA

WEST INDIA

West Madras

1013
1007

.

1054

Travl1Ilcore-Cochin •

1008

South Madras.

1006

North Madras •

1001

Kutch

.

Bombay-Konkan
CENTRAL INDIA East Madhya Pradesh

1079
1047
101 7

35. In general, the sex ratio is smaller in towns than in villages. For the
country as a whole, the sex ratio in villages is 966, while that in towns is 860.
The sex ratio in villages is lowest in North-West India (895). In the villages
of South India, females outnumber males, the sex ratio is 1004. In other
zones, the rural sex ratio varies thus: 92 5 in North India, 977 in East India,
979 in Central India and 987 in West India.
The urban sex ratio is lowest in East India (719) reflecting the deeply disturbing influence of Greater Calcutta. The urban sex ratio is highest in South
India (977). It varies in other zones as follows : 820 in North India, 838 in
West India, 843 in North-West India and 939 in Central India.
The difference between the rural sex ratio and the urban sex ratio is very
large in East India (258). It is smallest in South India (27). In other zones
it varies from 40 in Central India to 52 in North-West India and lOS in North
India to 149 in West India.
36. The low sex ratio of towns is further emphasized if the ratio is computed
separately for cities, that is to say, towns with a population of one lakh and over.
In the country as a whole, as mentioned already, there are 235 Jakhs of people
living in cities- of whom 132 lakhs are males and 103 lakhs are females. The
sex ratio for all cities of India is 787. It is lowest for East India (641) and

55

CHAPteR tI:

rItE PAtmaN OF LtvtNG-t95t

highest for South India (940). In other zones, the city sex ratio varies as
follows: 712 in West India, Sal in North India, S13 in North-West India and
934 in Central India.
The sex ratios for the ten largest cities (town groups) of India are shown
in TABLE I I. The enormous diffeTABLE II
rences between Greater Calcutta
Town group
Sex ratio
and Greater Bombay on the one
I. Greater Calcutta
602
hand and Madras and Hyderabad
2. Greater Bombay •
596
on the other are worth noting.

3. Madras
4. Delhi.
5. Hyderabad •
6. Ahmedabad.
7. Bangalore
8. Kanpur
9. Poona.
10. Lucknow

921

37. Are these differences in
numbers bet wee n males and
989
764
females really true, or are they
883
merely errors in countjng ? Some
699
50 years ago, scholars of western
833
Europe, who studied the results of
78 3
the Indian Censuses, took the view
that the figures could not be correct. They were accustomed to an excess of
females over males in western Europe and thought that a large difference in sex
ratio between India and western Europe was unnatural. A number of consjderations-- it seemed to thcm- supported their conclusion. The author of the
I91I Census Report summarised these considerations as follows:
75 0

"It is well known that the natives ofIndia are reticent regarding their women
and that in some parts women urc regarded as of very little account. It is, therefore, natural to suppose that the return of them at the Census should be
incomplete.
The age statistics show that the proportion of females is lowest between
the ages 10 and 20. This is the time of life when it might be supposed that
there would be a tendency to conceal the existence of unmarried females.
The increasing accuracy of each succeeding census has been accompanied
by a rise in the proportion of females. It is only reasonable to suppose that
there is a connection between the two phenomena.
The vital stathtics for the decade 1891-1900 disclosed a relatively low female
mortality and in this respect they were confirmed by the mortality rates deduced
from the age return of the last Census."

3S. A reasoned refutation of all these arguments is furnished at some length
jn the 19II Census Report. The main point was that if the female deficiency
was due to omissions, then omissions must be of the order of 9 per cent which
- in view of the arrangements which had been perfected by 1911- was

56

§Ek iui't6
altogether out of the question. The tbeory of omissions was also contradicted
by internal evidence :
"The Census staff being more largely composed of permanent officials,
was more efficient in the Punjab than in most other parts of India, but it is here
that the deficiency of females is most marked.... If reticence 'regarding
women had any effect, it would reduce the proportions for Muhamedens
more than those for Hindus but in almost i all parts of India the proportion
offemales among the adherents of that religion is relatively high. . .. In the
Punjab. where the general proportion is very low, it is lowest among the Sikhs,
who on the whole, are least reluctant to talk about their women ..... There
is a difference of more than a hundred in the proportions per mille between two
of the natural divisions in the Madras Presidency although women hold exactly the
same position in both. The animistic tribes neither scorn nor seclude their
women, but there are extraordinary differences among such tribes in different
parts of India. IJ

The reality of female deficiency, where this is shown by census figures to be
very pronounced, was also independently attested by certain social conditions
which were known to exist "such as the very high bride-prices which are com"
monIY pal'd.......
39. In 1911 it was necessary to establish the reality of female defidency in
India by elaborate arguments. This is no longer necessary for two reasons:
First,- Successive censuses have since repeated and confirmed the pattern
of difference in the sex ratio, This is seen from the following table
TABLE 12

Sex

ratiQ

(GENERAL POPULA1ION PER 1000 MALES)
r----~-.-..... --....A.~---------~

Zone

19:Jl

J!},H

19·1/

19:j1

North India

909
986

90 4

90 7

910

967

95 1

945

South India
West India,
Central India
North-West India

lOll

1010

1001

94 1
972
853

~41

94 1

968

966

863

87 1

999
93 8
973
883

INDIA

956

95 1

946

947

East India.

Sectmdly,- We have arrried out an actual verification of the 1951 Census
COWlt, organised on a random sample basis throughout most parts of the country.
57

CHAPTER It:

tHE PAtTERN OF. LlVING-.1951

We know not only that the people who were omitted from the count were relatively few- we know with reasonable certainty what proportion of the population taey actually were. We also know the sex ratio of the people who were
ascertained, by verification, to have been omitted. It is true that among those
who were omitted, there were more females than males in all zones (with the
exception of Central India where there were a few more males than females).
But we know what the differences were. We can calculate (from the ascertained
figures) that if allowance were made for the omission, the sex ratio for India
should be 949 instead of 947; 1001 instead of 999 in South India; and 885
instead of 883 in North-West India. The difference involved in making or
not making an allowance for omissions is thus altogether negligible. We may
proceed on the basis that the numbers of the sexes do, in fact, differ in the
manner indicated by the published census figures.

40. In recent years, figures have been furnished for a great many countries
of the world. There are, however, still very large gaps and the statistics of all
countries carmot be regarded as equally reliable. Such as they are, the figures
show that in the world as a whole, the sex ratio is probably 992- that is to say,
tbere is perhaps a male excess in the world as a whole; but, if there is, it is very
very small. It is certain that the sexes are more nearly equal to one another in
the world as a whole than they arc in India. We have seen that there are large
variations in the sex ratio between different parts of India. In the same way,
there are also large variations between different parts of the world. In all
countries of Europe (except Ireland and Bulgaria) there is an excess of females.
This seems to be true also of the Soviet Union. In the United States of America
there used to be an excess of males among the people of European descent and
an excess of females among the negroes. In Canada, Australia, New Zealand and
South Mrica there has alwuys been a male excess among people of European
descent. The South American countries show instances both of male excess and
female excess. A large female excess seems to be a general characteristic of
many peoples of Africa. It is found in the Gold Coast, Nigeria, Uganda,
and Tanganyika. In Morocco and Tunisia, however, there is a male excess.

41. How do such differences arise? It is easy enough to see why a female
deficiency should be found in cities and the major towns. It arises
mainly by migratlon of people who go there in search of livelihood. These
are, in the first instance, mostly men. It is true that when the men settle down
the women may move up to join them- but this does not happen invariably,
and there is always a very considerable time-lag. So long, therefore, as towns
continue to grow; they are apt to have a diminishing sex ratio. When this

58

SEX RAtIO

process stOPS, and the towns grow mainly by the excess of births over deaths,
the sex ratio tends to change in the opposite direction and towards equality.
Somewhat similar considerations apply to a whole area (including villages and
towns) if~t is receiving migrants in large numbers. An important reason for the
(emale excess of Europe and the male excess of people of the same stock in
America, Oceania and Africa must no doubt be found in the selective character
of migration.,

42. This would not, however, explain the female deficiency of India,
much less of North India because the migratory movements in question are too
small in relation to the total population.
The true explanation has to be found in two facts: First,- Males and females
are not born in equal numbers; and Secondly,- They do not die in equal
numbers either in infancy and childhood or in old age or in any panicular
age-group, or at all ages taken together.
43. If we examine the statistics of registration of births in Madras for 10
years preceding the 1951 Census, we find that for every 1000 male children born
during the decade, only 948 female children were born. The ratio was as high
as 959 in one year (1941) and as low as 937 in another year (1949). These
figLlr~s- which

are not very different from one another- represent the
extremes; the ratios for all other years fell between these two limits.
A similar examination of the statistics of ten years in three other states
besides Madras, gives us the following results :
TABLE 13
Sex ratio at birth during 1941-,50

,.------- -_,._.. - State

Madras
Madhya Pradesh
Bomhsy.
Unar Pradesh

Average

Highest
during decade

Lowesl
during decade

948

959

937

939
935

946

921

937

93 1

857

874

843

These figures are very instructive and three points should be noted about
them:
FiT.'it,- In every case, there is a definite excess of male births over female
births ;

S9

CHAPTER iI:

THE PAITERN OF LiviNG-t95t

Secondly,- The excess is very much more pronounced in Uttar Pradesh
(North India) than in the other three states (which may be taken to be broadly
representative of South India, Central India and West India); and
Thirdly,--- The lowest and highest values recorded. over a period of ten
years do not differ very much; and this fact shows that the occurrence of an
excess at birth is not an accident, nor is the fact that this excess is much more
pronounced in Uttar Pradesh than in the other states. It would seem that we
are face to face with the working of some biological law. Is that conclusion
valid or is it vitiated by the fact that all births do not get registered? We know
It is also true that the extent
there are omission.c;; in the registration of births.
of such omissions is not the same in all the states. It cannot, therefore, be
denied that it is difficult to be certain on the conclusion stated. It i~, however,
exceedingly unlikely that the omitted births, if registered, would alter the
pattern so materially as to invalidate the conclusion. The causes which lead
to the omissions of registration of births are not peculiar to female births.
Female births are not much more likely to get omitted than male births. It is
difficult to think of any kind of systematic bias which would lead to continuous
and universal suppression of female births in such large numbers.
44. We must accept the existence of a male excess at birth as a fact. A deficiency of females arises in all parts of India as a biological phenomenon.
It is belivcd that this happens jn almost all parts of the world. Nature having
given rise to inequality, then appcms to set about redressing it. There is a
bias in infant deaths just as there is a bias in births. Male infants die in larger
numbers than female infants before completing the first year of life. The following table shows the figures for the same four states for which data regarding sex
ratio at birth were given already :
TABLE 14

,-.

State

Madras

Madhya Pradesh.
Bombay

Uttar Pradesh

60

Sex ratio of infants who died
within one year of birth during 1941-50

________________ ...A- __ . _ _ _ .. _ _ _ _ _ -.,

Average

Highest
during decade

Lowest
during decade

SEX RATIO

Here again the question arises, can we be sure that we arc not being misled
by the selective omission of female infant deaths? All things are possible- but
we have to judge what is probable. Large and consistent difference.." such a5 we
see in TABLE 14 cannot be attributed to this cause. There is, fortunately,
some corroborative evidence. If it is really true that fewer female infanrs
die than male inHmts, then the sex ratio of all infants living at <my one time must
be closer to 1000 (the index of equality) than the sex ratio at birth. This is
exactly what the census figures show, as may be seen frl1n1 th~ tabk below:
TABLE 15

Slale

Madras
Madhya Pradesh
Bombay
Uttar Pradesh

Sex ratio
at birth
(1 II j()
RegisTration
data)

Sex ratio
among infants
(/!},J/

Censux
data)

940
92 1
93 1
843

It will be observed that of all the four stales, Madras had the smallest
excess of maks at birth. Within a year, the inequality is wiped out and female
infants outnumber male infants. OJ] the other hand, Uttar l>rJdesh- which
had the largest male excess- ha"l got this excess somewhat diminished, hut yet
male infants outnumber female infants decisively.
Here again rigofOU'; logic
demand~ that we should make allowance for possible errors in the statement of
age at the census. Rut most people would agree that even jf the figures are
not exactly correct, they provide good enough corroboration.]

r

45. In the next section, we shall sec that just as the proportion of males
and females alters during the first y~al' of liii.!, it alters c.:ontinually from year to
year as people grow older. The strain of life and the risk of death tell heavily
on women at some ages and on men at others. This causes inequality in the
numbers of males and females dying at different ages. There seems to be
no uniform rule governing this inequality at all places and times- conditions
differ in different parts of the country at the same time and they have, no doubt,
changed from·time to time even at the same place. There is, however, a very
near approach to uniformity towards the end of life, just as there wac:; at
the beginning of life. Among the very old (as in the first year of life) the
hand of death falls on men more frequently than on women.

61

(""HAPTER 11:

THE PATTERN OF LIVlNG-I 9S1

46. What has been said so far is applicable mainly to what may be called
'normal' mortality. In the past, different parts of the country used to suffer
from 'abnormal' mortality. Once every few years, the hand of death fell more
heavily than nonnally- famine and pestilence occurred in extensive areas and
tooK a heavy toll. On these occasions, it has been observed and recorded that
deaths took place in notably unequal numbers among males and females. Men
used to die more than women when great famines occurred. On the other
hand, many forms of pestilence, especially plague, took a far heavier toll of
women than of men.
When, therefore, we observe the sex ratio at anyone time and anyone place
we should remember that it is the result of a long previous history of UlleqUal
numbers of male births and female births at times corrected and at other times
aggravated by unequal incidence of death- normal as well as abnormal. In
some places the ratios may have heen further modified by emigration or immigration.
47. When all this has been said, people will still want to know why male
births should persistently exceed female births, in all states ? Why should this
excess of male births over female births be persistently larger in Uttar Pradesh
and persistently smaller in other states? Again it may be asked, why is it that
the hand of death spares females more than males at the begining and the end
of life; and why the chances of death throughout life, should favour the females
more in some SUites than in others ?
It is possible that some completely satisfactory explanation of these facts
has been propounded by scientists who may have made a special study of them,
but the preseilt writer (who has not been able to make a detailed enquiry) has
not come across any such explanation. *

-Mention should be made of an opinion which has been frequently advanced. It is said (on the
better care end attention . in hcuscholds than
female children and it is surmised that this must have a significant effect on mortality at carly age
and again after infancy and consequently on the sex ratio. The implication II that this ill a more
pronounced characteristic of Indian household than of European households; and, within India, of
North Indian and North-West Indian households than households in other zones Of India. All this
seems plausible but it is to be doubted Whether the surmise is correct. SO 10D, aa females survive
better dnn males (and this occurs during and for sometime aftcr thc first year of life) . the ftct is
atributed to nature. When the opposite: occurs, it is attributed to nurture.
basi~ of general impression) that male children receive

62

Age PyraInids -

India and U. S. A.

AGE PYRAMIDS

INDIA
CENSUS 1951
AGE
75 AND
OVER
65-74

Ela'~r(!/ m~n

55-64

45-54

35-44

2.5-34
Youn,g women

Youn,g men

15-24
Girls
chil
10,000

5,000

o

S,OOO

15,000

10,000

U.S.A.
CENSUS 1950

AGE
75 AND
OVER
65-74

£fder{y woms

55-64
45-54
M'-cldle agea' wOfflen
I

Middle o,ged men
I

35- 44 1
25-34

YOLf'!!1 women
15-Z4·

5 -14

I

children
10,000

MALE

5,000

o

5,000

10.,000

FEMALE

ISPOD

Age Pyramids - India, Rural and Urban

AGE PYRAMIDS

INDIA_, RURAL
CENSUS 1951

AGE
75 AND

OVER

Elder(!; women

Elder{!; men

65-74
55-64

45-54
35-44
Z5-34
You~women

Youn,g men
15-24

Girls

5-14 B,!!!s

~JlIIIIIIBI§lIIIIII~IIII§lII~I§§lIIIIIIBlIIII~BlI§~~

Infanfs
0-41~

15.,000

10,000

o

5,000

10,000

children

15,,000

INDIA_, URBAN
CENSUS 1951

AGE
75 AND

OVER

Elder{!; men

65-74

ElderlY women

55-64
45-54
Middle o,ged women
35-44

Z5-34

Youn.9 women

15-24
5-'4

l;irls

Bo.!ls

0-4In~~IIIIIII§IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII~IIIIIIIIII~Il~~ children

Infants ::_ncl

o

'SpOO

MALE

FEMALE

Age Pyramids -

Greater Bombay and Calcutta

AGE PYRAMIDS

GREATER BOMBAY
CENSUS 1951
AGE
7SAND
OVER

E/tlBr{!;

65-74

me.n

Elder{tj women

55-64

45-54

Middle qged men
35-44

25-34

Youn9men

15-24

5-14
0- 4

Girls

L____~/n~fi.~a~n~f.s~an~d~_lllllllllllrslllll~_~OUn8
o

20.,000

15,,000

10,000

5,000

5,000

children

10...0 00

CALCUTTA
CENSUS 1951

AGE
75 AND

OVER
65-74

Eld6r{!l men

55-64
45-54

'f!1ed women
3!;'-44

25-34

5-14

Girls

I
2~000

15,000

10,000
... AI

~

spoo

o

IOpOO

clriltlren

D - Age Structure
AT nns CENSUS, as in all previous censuses, the age of every CItIZen
was ascertained and recorded. In some countries, the actual date of birth is
sought to be ascertained- not always very successfully. This is out of the
question in India, as the number of people who recollect or keep 1 record of
their date of birth is altogether negligible. We seek only to a~certain the age
in number of years. There used to be some difficulty of definition- whether age
meant the number of completed years at the birthday preceding the enquiry,
or the birthday succeeding the enquiry or at the birthday which is nearest
to the enquiry. In India, we have settled down to the first of these three
definitions of age. An infant is defined as "a child which has not yet
completed 12 months of life".
49. Specifications of this kind have value only at very young agcs- where
a few months more or less may make a large difference to the numbers. But,
in general, so few people know their age correct to the nearest year that the
errors which may arise out of an unprecise definition are small in comparison
with the errors which arise out of ignorance of the actual age. All the world
over people seem to make much the same kind of elTor about age. In
some countries, the people err in large number than in others. In general,
the people who do not know their own age exactly tend to estimate it by quinquenniums or decades. The people who have returned ages ending in 0 or 5
are very much more numerous than those who have returned ages ending in
adjoining digits. Others who try to make a closer approximation prefer to
think of their age as an even number rather than any odd number (except five).
At lower agc..~, there are some preferences which are even more well-marked.
Age 12 is extremely popular and age 18 is nearly so. We do not apparently
share, however, one weakness which is prominently observed in some other
countries. Our women folk- speaking generally and in large numbcrs- are
not keen on being recorded as younger than they are.
The real difficulty in our country has been not so much the tendency
to prefer particular digits (of which we have very much more than our
fair share), as complete inability to make any returns at all. A surprisingly
large number of people decline even to make the attempt to figure out
their own age. As part of a regular routine based on experience, the enumerators were warned in advance against this contingency and clearly instructed
that they must make an effort to make the best possible estimate of age in such
cases with the help of bystanders. They were equipped for this purpose, with
a 'calendar of important events' - eyents of such local notoriety that every

63

CHAPTER II:

THE PATTERN OF LIVING-I951

one could be expected to remember one or other of them, and recall what he
was like when the event occurred. The enumerator would then work out the
age for him.
Information about women is frequently obtained second-hand. So the
estimates arc apt to be cruder for women than for men.
In spite of all difficulties, we have got a very complete return of agethe number of persons for whom age was not recorded works out to only about
6 per 10,000. It was the practice (followed at the 1931 Census as . well as
some earlier censuses) to submit the returns of age thus secured to a kind of
purification ceremony. The high priest must be an actuary who can use complicated mathematical formulae in order to purge the returns of irregularities
caused by biases for particular digits and thus produce 'smoothed' Age Tables.
Thls was a necessary preliminary to a further process of calculation which
yielded 'Life Tables'. The practice was followed at this census also. The
examination of returns was carried out by Shri S. P. JAIN of the Ministry of
Labour, Government of India. He has tarried out this work with great thoroughness and prepared 'smoothed' Age Tables and Life Tables. They have been
published separately along with detailed explanatory reports submitted by the
officer. In addition, the original returns furnishing the figures for each year
of age, as recorded, have also been published so that users of census statistics
may study for themselves the nature of the biases which were present and make
their own independent calculations, if so desired.
While these elaborate precautions are necessary before the data can be
used for refined computations, where single year age returns are significant, it
is found that figures for each and every year of age are unnecessary for most
purposes : figures for broad age-groups of ten years each (or even
broader) are ample at the higher ages and five year groups are sufficient at
younger ages after the fifth year. As the original returns (whether furnished
by the citizen himself or estimated for him by the enwnerator) are generally
correct to this degree of approximalion, it will be found that the 'unsmoothed'
figures are good enough- provided they are not relied on for mdividual ages
or narrower age-groups than those mentioned above.
50.

51. The picture presented by these returns may be readily grasped by
reference to the 'age pyramid' diagrams preceding this section. Let us
follow the first of these diagrams- which relates to the country as a whole,
including towns as well as villages.
The bottom slab of the pyramid, it will be obeserved, is ha1f as broad as all
the other slabs above it. This is because it stands for infants and yotmg

li4

'

AGE STRUCTURE

.children- those who are 0, I, 2, 3 or 4 years old (a five-year age-group). All other
slabs (which are twice as broad as the bottom slab) stand fur ten-year age-groups,
viz., 5-14, 15-24,25-34 and so on except the top-most slab which stands for all
ages above 74.
The first fact to be noticed is that the length of every higher slab is smaller
than that of the lower slab for there were fewer people in it. The number in
each slab, is shown below as a percentage of the total number of all ages :
TABLE 16

Age-group

Percentage

Infants and young children

o to 4

13'5

Boys and girls .

5 to 14

24'8

Young men and women

Middle-aged men and women

Elderly persons

J

IS to 24

"l

17'4

25 to 34

15'6

{

35 to 44
45 to 54

U'9

(

55 to 64
65 to 74
75 and over

~

L

8'5
5'1
2'2
J '0
100'0

52. Let us now compare the age pyramid of India with that of the United
States of America. First we note that the bottom slab in America, is shorter
than in India. In America infants and young children are 10' 8 per cent while
they are 13' 5 per cent in India, Looking up, we find the next slab to be even
shorter. American boys and girls number 16' 3 per cent only, while Indian
boys and girls number 24'8 per cent. If we combine the two slabs together
they are 26'3 per cent under age 15 in America, while the corresponding number
in India is 38'3 per cent.
The next two slabs stand for 'young men and women'. The lower slab of
America is somewhat shorter than ours, while the higher slab is the first to be
somewhat larger. Adding up, young men and women are 30' 4 per cent in
America against 33' 0 per cent in India. . The next two slabs of middle-aged
men and women are both larger in America than in India- the total· number
in America is 25·6 per ceRt again~t India's 20· 4 per cent.
The last three slabs of elderly persons arc similarly larger ill America than in
India, The total nl.Jmbcr jn America is J6' 9 per cent against India's 8" 3 per cent·
65

CHAPtER n:

THE PATTERN OF'LlVING-.I951

53. 'It is very important that we should take note of the enormous difference
between India and America in respect of the area of the two bottom slabs. Out
of every 1,000 persons, there are 271 people under age 15 in America
and there are 3&3 in India, The number is nearly one-half as large again in
India as in America, This means- even if an average Indian married couple
had the same resources to 'spend on bringing up their children as an average
American married couple, each Indian child can only get a much smaller share
of these resoW'ces than each American cbild, because the same resoW'ces have
to be spread over a larger number, Actually, of course, the resources available to
an average Indian married couple are very much smaller- which makes the
disparity in the number to be looked after, all the more serious, The dry
figures tell their story quite c1early- in terms of food, shelter, care and
attention during illness, education and every kind of preparation for life, the
Indian child is handicapped unmistakably and of necessity,
54, The following table shows, in one view, how the juvenile proportion
varies in different zones of India and compares it with that of Japan, and a few
EW'Opean countries :
TABLE 17
Percentage to total population of
Persons under Infants and Boys and
age 15
young children
girls

38 'S
37'9
36'9

{ North India .
East India ~ ,
ZoNES OF INDIA·
South India •
West India
Central Indira

r'

JAPAN

t

r Germany

COUNTRIES

,
United Kingdom
Italy
,
,
France
,

25'0
24'2
24'4
25'7
25'3

35'4

13'5

21 '9

23'S

7'0
8'6
9'2
7'2

16'5
13'9
17' 1
14'6

39'S

.

EUROPEAN

38 '7

13'5
13'7
12'5
13'8
13'4

,

22.'5

26'3
21 'S

-The proportions for the zones of India have been worked out from age tables which excluded
displaced persons, The figures for North·West India which are inclusive of displaced persons are
as follows:
Pel'lODll under age IS
39'6
Infanta and young children
14' 5
ao)'l and girl,
2~ "

A.GE STRUCTURE

It may be observed that the juvenile proportion is very similar in all the zones ;
it is somewhat smaller in Japan but not very different; the proportions for all
the four European countries are very much smaller.

55. Infants numbered 3'3 per cent of the population (or almost exactly one
in thirty) among the people of India.
The highest proportion was found in North-West India (4' I) and the
lowest in South India (2 '6). The figures for other zones, in order, were: East
India (3 '7), North India and West India (3 '3) and Central India (3 '0).

It might seem at first sight that this is probably also the order in which
the zones would be placed if arranged according to their birth rate. But this
does not follow, necessariJy, For one thing, the number of infants counted
at the census represents the number born during the preceding 12 months less
those among them who died during the preceding 12 months. The rates of
infant mortality need not differ from one zone to another in the same manner as
the birth rate- in fact, they do not, So, the proportion of the net number of
infants found and counted need not indicate the order among zones as regards
children born.
Again, as noted already, there is need for caution in acting on figures for
single years, Though there is little difficulty about recollecting whether a child
had completed 12 months or not, one cannot be sure that significant errors did
not creep in. A consistent error of even one month in either direction might
make a sizeable difference in the resulting number and percentages.
There is also a special difficulty. In compiling the tables on which these
results are based, displaced persons were excluded. Such exclusions make
little difference to the relative proportions of different age-groups in most parts
of the country. But in North-West India where the upheaval was greatest,
the figures are bound to be distorted. The distinction must be specially
observable among infants and young children since the children of displaced
persons are not reckoned as displaced persons and have been counted in.

56. Infants and young children- These are all children under 5. They
number 13' 5 per cent of the total population- that is to say, rather more than
one in eight and less than one in seven.
#

The proportion is IS'6 per cent in North-West India where it is accidentally exaggerated for the reasons already noticed. It is lowest in South India
where it is 12' 5 per cent. In the other four zones, it is very nearly the same :
W~l 1Jldia \Ir8~ East India (13 '7) North India (13'5), and Central

frt

TJ,re r<\TTERN OJ<: UVING-'t951

CHAPTER II:

India (13' 4). The low figure for South India- as we shall see pres~ly- is
corroborated by corresponding differences in birth rates and death rates.

57. Infants, young children, boys and girls- These include all people under
age 15. In the country as a whole, they number 38' 3 per cent of the total
population. As in the younger groups the proportion is lowest in South India
(36'9) and accidentally exaggerated in North-West India (40' 4), In other zones,
the proportions are as follows: West India (39'S), Central India (38'7), North
India (38'S) and East India (31'9).
58, Comparison with other cmmtries of the 'lVorld~ Relevent figures arc
unavailable for Soviet Russia and some other important countries of the world.
The figures for some other countries may be affected by error in varying
degrees, Such as they are, the infonnation made available in,publications of the
United Nations shows that in the world as a who1e, infants number 2' 8 per cent
against India's 3' 3 ; infants and young children number 12' 4 per cent against
India's 13' 5; and all people under age 15 number 33 '9 per cent against India's
38 '3. Those parts of the world where the proportions are low can be
distinguished from those parts of the world where the proportions are high as
shown below :
TABLE 18
HIGH JUVENILE PROPORTIONS

LOW JUVENILl! PROPORTIONS

Territory
Europe

Percentage to total
population of

Percentage to lotal
population of

Infants Persons
and young under
In/ants cln'ldren agp, 15

[tifants Persons
and young under
Infants children age 15

2'0

9'8

Germany
1'5
U.K.
I'S
Italy.
1'8
France
1'6
North America 2' 2
U.S.A.
?
Oceania
2'5

7'0

26'9
23'S

8'6

22'S

9'2
7'2
10'9
10'8

26'3
21'8
27'6

JO'5

2TI
26'0

Territory
India
Japan
South-East
Asia
South-West
Asia
SOllth &
Central
America
Africa

.

2'8

13·5
13'5

38·3
35'4

3'3

IS·I

40 °9

3'1

16 °7

4°·6

3' I
2'9

14'6
13"7

40°1

3'3

39'Y

59· Elderly persons-· At the other cnd of the scale we may compure the
variations in the proportjon of el~erly persons to the total population. For tht;
68·
"
'
,
..

.,

\

\

,I.

,'.

r

AGE STRUCTURlt

country

as a whole, the figures were 8'5 per cent-or very nearly one in twelve.
Among the zones, the highest proportion is fOWld in East India (8' 9) and the
lowest in West India (7' I). The proportions in the other zones are : NorthWest India (8 .6), South India (8' 5), North India (8 .4), and Central India (7' 8).
If we compare with other countries of the world, we get the result that the
proportion of people who live beyond middle age is generally high in those
parts of the world where the juvenile proportion is low, and the converse is
also true. This is seen from the table below :
TABLE 19

Percentage to
LOtal population
of people aged
Territory
Europe
Gerntany
U, K.
Italy
France
North America .

U. S. A.
Oceania

,

TBTrilory

55 and above

,
•
•

12'0

21'4

India
Japan
South-East Asia
South-West Asia
South & Central America .

•

16' S

Africa

17' 2

19'1
21'1

8'3
11'0

7'3
9'5

7'4
8'S

16'9
17' 8

For the world as a whole, the proportion is 12'0 per ccnt.
60. We may now turn to the age pyramid for villages and towns of India-

separately shown as the third and fourth ofthc series of 'age pyramid' diagrams.
The following table shows the comparative figures :
TABLE 20

populalwll i"
,,-.,.PercclIlage eo total
Villages
Infants & young children
Boys & girls .
Young men & women
Middle-aged men & women .
Elderly persons

Towns

13,7

12·9

25. 1

23·2

32 .3

36 ,5

20·4

20.1

8·5

7·3

100.0

--

--

100,0

This table might suggest the presence of a tendency in towns to diminution in the juvenile proportion. This might easily lead to incorrect inferences

~

tttAPTE~ 1I:

TIlE PAttERN' OF LIVING-1951

about the effect of urban life on the birth rate. It should be borne in mind
that the relevant figures are a corollary of two facts : first that towns have
fewer women relatively than villages and so relatively fewer children are
born ; and secondly, towns grow in part by migratory movements in which
persons under age 15 tend to be under-represented.

61. The differences in age-structure between the rural and urban population
become greatly exaggerated in the cities. ThLc; is clearly brought out by the
fantastic distortions of the age pyramid for Greater Bombay and Calcutta citiesthe last two of the series of 'age pyramid' diagrams, The abnormal excess of
males over females is, of course, the main cause of these distortions. Even
when allowance is made for this fact, and the age-structure is analysed
separately for males and females, the following differences appear :
TABLE 21

Percentage co population of
r--

India
Males

(GENERAL)

Bombay
and
Calcutta

Percentage to population oj
1

Females

India

Bombay
and

(GENERAL)

Calcutta

Infants & young
children
Boys
Young men.
Middle-aged men .
Elderly men,

13'2
24'9
3 2 '6
21 '0
8·3

7'7
14'5
49'1
24 ' I
4'6

Infants & young
children,
13·9
Girls,
24·7
Young women
33'3
Middle-aged women 19' 6
Elderly women
8'5

13'4
22'7
4°'0
18'0
5'9

MALES (all ages)

100,0

100,0

FEMALES (all ages) 100·0

100·0

Young men, young women and middle-aged men are (in that order) overrepresented in the two large cities, All other age-groups are more or less
under-represented in both sexes.
.

E - Marital Status Pattern
OUT OF EVERY 10,000 persons in India (not reckoning displaced persons),
there are 5,133 males and 4,867 females, Among them 2,521 males and 1,886
females are unmarried. If we reckon males and females together, the unmarried
people are 44· I per cent of the pppulation.

70

DISTRIBUTION BY CIVIL CONDITION OF 10-,000 PERSONS
IN INDIA AND THE SIX ZONE S
INDEX.

c::=Jc=Jc:=J
FEMALES ___ c::J[=:JCJ

MALES _____

UNMARRIED
3~OOO~-----------------------------------------------N-O-RT~H---W-E~S~T-'
SOUTH IND,A
WESlINO,A
:!!DIA
.-.-EA!tT
NORTH
IHDIA
CENTRAL
INDIA
INDI"
'NDI"
~

-

~

....-.

- --

2,,000-

1,000 >--

f--

f----

F"-

f----

~--

f--

MARRIED
3,000
EAST
INDIA

NORTH
INDIA
r-

l,O 00 ___,

V

:..>;
~;::.:

~>,:~

~::.'"

CENTRAL

r-

--

/",'

':?'
~.~ ~.;

/,~:~

INDIA

SOUTH 'NOlA
f.------1 , -

..../

.,
,

.. "

,

//

,~

~>
1,0 uu

f~

1/"

[,;'; f---

I~<

~,/ ,

/,.

i,

>.-'
"

/./

;~
I l~

0

~>.

I/~' f - -

t:;~

k;;

;.:>..'
i

:.:;.
./,

m

:>"

~~

~~
'~;~

"

:;;:: I-./
tX,/;:'
~

<~A

r/

--,

~
~<;

'?~-).~
;,:~
/1'

r'"/
>,!
~~~;,
I~'I

f-~~
.I,

v~/./

~:8
~/
/

WEST
INDIA

.....,

~

j~i--

;""..:
"
,/'
,.
.
i

-' '

,I;,

""

':~." f - -

;/
?',

,>

INDIA

r-

NOATH-WEST

~

-'HD'A
):
./>_
,,>

~~~>
,II'

::~
-/,!.
;~

',I

~.;:

~ I---

",.'

/t

''<>
.,.<.,.
..

[1"

WIDOWE D OR DIVORCED

;:~i

/

""

(:~
~~:

-

1,:,

','

,I,

'/.

'//

.'.
/::.

(:

,f

~

i

'

,. I

~

r-i·::

,"

,;/

~
.".,-

l%

~
t~
~

MARtrAL StAtUS 1'.AT'fERN

. The proportion of unmarried people is highest in South Ineful (4~ . 2 pe~ cent)
and is lowest in Central India (41' 1 per cent), In otber zones, It vanes as
follows: West
India (4TO)
TABLE 22
North·· West India (46' I) East
India (42'2) and North India
=:'~d r;:;:ne::ri~ (41 ' 4) . The proportion must,
among
among
obviously, be different for males
Zone
males
females
and females, In the country as a
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - whole, roughly every other male
6
~~~~~!ia.
4 .3
35·9
person is unmarried ; while rather
South India
~!:
~~
less than two out of five females
West India
52.6
40.9
are un mar r i e d. The actual
Central India
46.5
35.6
percentage for each zone and for
North-West India
So. I
41.4
India are shown in TABU 22.
South India, it will be noted,
INDIA
49. I
38.8
stands first as regards proportion of
unmarried people even when males
and females are considered separately. The order in other zones is : West
India, North-West India, Central India, North India and East India, if
unmarried males are considered separately; and North-West India, West India,
East India, North India and Central India, if unmarried females alone are
considered.

;

:

63. According to the law· of the land, child marriages are punishable
offences. At the 195 1 Census we counted 28 lakhs and 33 thousand married
• E",eractfrum the Child Marriage RllStraint Act. 1929 (Act No. XIX oj 1929):

"2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or contcxt,(a) "Child" means a person who, if a male, is under eighteen years of age, and if a female, is under

fourteen years of age ;
(b) "Child marriage" means a marriage to which either of the contracting parties is achild ;
(c) "contracting party" to a marriage means either of the parties whose marriage is thereby lolemnia,d;

and
(d) "minor" means a person of eIther sex who is under eighteen years of age.
3. Whoever, being a male above eighteen years of age and below twenty-one, contracts a child marriage
ahall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupee8,
4. Whoever, being a male above twenty--one years of age, contracts a child marriage shall be punisb::.blc
with simple imprisonment which may extend to one mOnth, or with fine which may extend to one th.ousand
rupees, or with both.
.

S. Whoever performs, conducts or direct. any child malTiage shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both
unless he proves that he had reuon to believe that the marriage was not a child marriage.

[ FH""". ",,~d

7'

ftlales, 61 lakhs and 18 thousand married females, 66 thousand widowers and 134
thousand widows- all between the
TABLE 23

ages of 5 and 14. We do not know
Married and widowed the number of married females aged
persons under 15 years
14 nor of married males 'aged IS'
. of age
16
and 17. The latter marriages are
r-----.. . . . .punishable Wlder law, while the
Percenage to
Number
IOlaJ popuJa- former are not,
If we may set off
Zone
(IN LAKHS) lion of the zc,ne
one against the other, the total
number counted Wlder age 15North India
4' I
East India,
3'2
n ear I y 92 lakhs- may be reSouth India
0'7
5'2
garded as the approximate number
6'8
West India
1'7
of marriages contracted in conCentral India
19'2
3'7
travention of the law, This number
North-West India
2'2
7'0
was distributed among the different
INDIA
1
2'6
zones as shown in TABLE 23,
9 'S
North India leads among the six
zones, with one person out of eve.ry 25 married in contravention of the law.
Central India (with one in 27) and East India (with one in 31) are not far
behind.
With reference to these deplorable figures, however, it should be mentioned
tRat there is clear evidence that the child marriage rates arc diminishing. Married
females under 15 were 9' 6 per cent of all married males in 1941 and this dropped
to 7' 4 per cent in 1951. There is a similar drop in North India (from 10' 9 to
10' I), in East India (from 10' 5 to 8' 2), in South India (from 5' 0 to 2' 6), in
West India (from 9'5 to 6'0), in Central India (from I2'8 to 10'6), and in
North-West India (from 7' 4 to 6' 5),
64. If we exclude all persons Wlder age 15 and consider only persons aged
IS and over, the results will be as shown in TABLE 24 on opposite pJgc,
Footnote ccmtluded J

•

6, (1) Where II minor contracts B child marriage any person having charge of the minor,whether IlS parent
or guardian or in any other capacity,lawful or unlawful, who does any act to promote the tnarriap;e or permits
it to be solemnised, or negligently fails to prevent it from being solemnised, shall be punishable with simple
imprisonment which may extend to onc month or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or .... ith
botla :
Provided that no woman shall be punishable with imprisonment,
(.2) Pot the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed, unless and untitl the contrary is tJroved that,
where a minor has contracted a cbild marriage, the person having charge of such minor has negligently failed
to prCTcnt tbe: marriagc from being solcmnised,"

MARitAL stAtus PAttERN
TABLE 24
Perc8nt08B unmarried amoJ18
Zone
North India
East India"
South India
West India
Central India
North-West India
INDIA

Males aged 15
and over

Females aged 15
and over

17'9

4'0

17"5

6'0
10' I

27'9
Z3'V
IS'S
19'3
20'3

6'S

4"0

t)'2
6'4

If we compare the figures for women, we find that the India percentage is 6' 4 ;
that is to say, out of every 16 women aged 15 and over one is unmarried, In two
zones- North India and Central India- unmarried women are fewer ; they
are only about one in 25 among women aged 15 and over, South India has
the largest number- about one in 10, The other three zones- West India;
North-West India and East India- are round about the India average of one
in 16.
The followjng table shows how lnma compares with other countries of
the world in this respect :
TABLE 25

Percentage unmarried among
Country
India
United Kingdom {1931

Males aged IIJ
and over

20'3
36'6
195 1
26'9
Italy (1936)
37' 4
West Gertnany (1946) , 2 8 ' 9
France (1946)
30'5
U, S, A, (1940) •
, 33'2
Canada (1941)
,39'S

Females aged Iii
and O't/sr
6'4
36'2
25'S
33'0
29'0
25'0
25'8
33'0

65. It should not be supposed that the percentages shown in TABLES 24
and 25 represent the numbers of women who never marry and remain spinsters for life. IT the percentages are tak~h in later years, they will be smaller

13

CaAPTER it:

tltE PATtERN OF LlVING-,195I

because more and more of them would get married in later years. Thus, for
instance, the proportion of unmarried women to the total population of India
diminishes rapidly, with successive age-groups as shown below:
TABLE 26
Percentage of total population of women r.oho
remain unmarried

Age-group

in all age-groups subsequent to the age-group
in the first column

in the age-group

0-4
5- 1 4
15-24-

6'7
10'2

12'1

1 '5

25-34
35-44

0'2
0'1

0'4
0'2

1'9

o· 1

66, We have seen already in TABLE 22 that, in the country as a whole, 49' I
per cent of all males and 38' 8 per cent of all females are unmarried. It follows
that 50' 9 per cent of all males must be either married men or widowers,
Similarly, 61' 2 per cent of all females must be either married women or widows.
[ There is a very small number* of men and women, who are divorced persons
and who have not re-married, Their number is included among those of
widowers and widows,] The following table shows the proportions of married
men and married women, widowers and widows seperately for India and the
zones :
TABLE 27

Percentage of all
males who are
Zone
North India
East India,
South India
West India
Central India
North-West India
INDIA

Percentage of all
females who are

Married

Widowers

Married

Widows

46'6
49'3
41'S
43'2
48'6
43'7

7'0
4'4
4'2
4'2
4'9
6'0

52 '1
50 '1
43'4
46 '0
50'3
48 '8

12'0
12' I
14'3
13 ' I
14'0
9'8

45'8

5'0

48 '4

12'8

-The number of divorced persons in India is 144,786 - 0'4 per cent ofthe total population.

14

MARtTAL StATUS PAt'TEt{N

South India, Central India and West India have rather more widows than
East India, North India and North-West India. There is one widow for every
three married women in South India- while the India ratio is very nearly
one to four.

67. It may seem a bit odd that there should be an appreciable difference
in numbers between married males and married females- as polygamy, though
it exists, is known to be very rare. The explanation is to be found in the fact
that the percentages refer to males and females separately and the sexes are
unequal in number. Actually married males and married females are almost
exactly equal in number in the country as a whole. Out of every 10,000 persons
in India, there are 2,353 married males for every 2,357 married females. But
the corresponding figures for zones are not nearly so close to one another as the
following table shows :
TABLE 28

Number per 10,000 persons who are

Column .1
minus

Zone

Married males

Married females

column 2

1

2

J

4

2,44 1
2,53 2
2,074
2,228
2,463
2,3 2 6

2,482
2,438
2,J69
2,228
2,4 83
2,29 1

2,353

2,357

North India
East India
South India
West India
Central India
North-West India
INDIA

+4 1
--94

+95
+20

-35

+4

West India is remarkable for its balanced numbers. There is a small, but
nevertheless curious, excess of married females in South India. On the other
hand, there is an almost equal excess of married males in East India. Similarly,
there is as excess of married males in North-West India, matched by somewhat
smaller excesses of married females in North India and Central India.
As there is no suggestion of polyandry in East India, it may be assumed that
the main explanation for these minor differences must be found in migration.
It is probable that a good many missing husbands of South India are earning a
living in other zones or outside India~ while the wives are at home.
This fact of temporary separation of husbands and wives is brought out more
prominently when we consider the figures for villages and towns. Out of 10,000
persons in all the villages of India 2,338 are married males and 2A07 are married
females. The excess of married females in villages is of the order of 69 per IO,OOO~

75

ciuPrER It:

,

.

".,

,~

I

THE PAttERN OF LIV1NG-l95;tl

Aroong 10,000 persons in all the towns of India, there are 2,.pg married males
and only 2,105 married females. The excess of married males in towns is of the
order of 324 per 10,000.
There are very wide differences in this respect between the zones. ThUs
in South Indian towns, the number of husbands (2,°78) does not eXceed the
number of wives (2,124); while in the towns of East India there are as many
as 2,992 husbands and only 1,909 wives.
68. We may conclude this section with a reference to a somewihat
iinportant change that appears to be taking place in the marital stanis pattern,
tJiz., a fall in the proportion of widows.
The following table compares the proportion of widows and widowers
between 1931 and 1951, and shows that the proportion of widows has
decreased in every zone :
TABLE 29

Percentage of widowers Percentage 0/ widows
to alJ males
lO all females
Zone

1931

1951

1931

19fH

North India

7"9

4'7
4 'x

7'1
4'4

15'1

East India ,
South India

1:2 '0
12' i

West India
Central India
North-West India

5'6

INDIA

4'2

16'8
17'2

14'3

5'4

4'2
4'9

15'4

13' I
14'0

8'S

6' 1

12'7

9'S

5'6

5'0

16' 1

12'8

16'1

The proportion of widowers has also dropped in five out of six zones but
the difference is small, The decreases in the percentage of widows between
1931 and 1951 are too large and too consistent to be dismissed as accidental.
They are clearly significant; but what do they signify? Do they mean that
husbands tend to live longer than they used to and so the proportion of
widows is falling? Or do they mean that the custom of non-remarriage of
widows is weakening and more women tend to remarry after widowhood than
before? There arc some valuable indications pointing to increasing longevity
as a fact~ while there is little evjdence of any very striking departures from
custom in respect of remarriage of widows. On the whole, one is inclined to
accept the former as the main, if not the sole, expianatiom of the fall in the
proportion of widows.
76

BIRTH RAmS AND. DEATH RATES

In that case, it may be objected. whyis there no similar faU of a substantial
nature in. the proportion of widowers? In support of this objection, it may be
contended that it is very unlikely that the conditions which have favoured an
increase in. the length of life are specially favourable to males only and have not
benefited females equally. The objection, though apparently strong, is not
conclusive. Since there is no custom of non-remarriage of widowers the small
proportion of widowers represents mainly the hard core of old men who will not
~Il)a.rry because they are too old, and also a number of others who have become
widowers but have not yet remarried but would do so sooner or later. Women
may tend to live longer than before, without making any difference to the latter
class of widowers and they may not also make a difference to the former if the
improved expectation of life is evenly spread over all ages and not concentrated
at old ages. The objection is not sustainable.
It is quite possible that both men and women have equally benefited
by conditions favouring a longer life than formerly ; and yet the result is made
visible by a substantial drop in the pwportion of widows, and only a very small
one in the proportion of widowers. It is probably correct to hold that the
drop in the proportion of widows need not necessarily have been caused by any
very material change in the custom of non-remarriage of widows. It should,
on the other hand, be accepted as one of the indications that fewer people die
prematurely and more people tend to live long; or, in other words, a modest
improvement in the expectation of life has taken place within the last two
d~cades.

F - Birth Rates and Death Rates
BlRms AND DEATIIS arc among the most important events which occur

in the life of every household. OUf knowledge of how lhe number and the
living pattern of our people have changed in the past and, therefore, our opinion
about how they may be expected to change in the future are bound to be vague
and sketchy, if not incorrect, unless we achieved a clear understanding of the
relationship between these vital events and the changing pattern of life.
70. Government have made arranf,('ments for ~ccuring that births and
deaths are reported as and when they occur and the occurrences are placed on
record together with essential.minimum information regarding date and pJace

77

CHAPTER II:

THE PATTERN OF LIVING-l951

and parties concerned. There is the system of official registration of bjrths
and deaths. The primary data thus secured are then compiled and returns showing the numbers of births and deaths in different parts of the country as weJI as
birth rates and death rates computed from them, are published at regular inter·
vals by State Governments, for each State and by the Central Government,
for India.
If reporting is complete and the basic records are correctly maintained, the
changes in numbers recorded by the census at ten-yearly intervals should
tally with the balance of births and deaths during the ten-year period, leaving
only a relatively small margin to be explained by the net balance of migration
of people, in and out of the territory in questiC'n.
'

71. Let us take Uttar Prade.sh as an illustrat;on. In 1951 the state had
a total population of 632 Jakhs. Ten years earlier, according to the 1941 Census,
there were 565 lakhs of people in the same territory. The number had grown
by 67 lakhs in ten years. There were arrangements for registration of births
and deaths in most villages and towns of the state- but some small bits of
territory (of the princely states which were 'merged' in Uttar Pradesh shortly
before the 1951 Census) did not have them. This is a complication but a small
one- because the population of the area where there was no registration was a
little Wlder one-fortieth of the whole state and we may make allowances accordingly.
During ten years preceding the 1951 Census the authorities of Uttar Pradesh
registered 145 lakhs of births. They also registered 971akhs of deaths. The
excess of births over deaths being 48 lakhs, the population must have increased
by that number. According to the census, the increase was 67 lakhs. How
are we to accOlUlt for the remaining 19 lakhs ? Were they displaced persons
who had come into the state from Pakistan? No, we have counted them; they
are only 5 lakhs. We also know that at about the time they came in, others
migrated to Pakistan from Uttar Pradesh. Though we do not know this number
precisely, we have reasons to believe that it was not perhaps far short of the
nwnber who came in. So the question about the 191akhs remains to be answered.
Evidently, a great many binhs escaped registration; and so also, no doubt,
deaths. The basic record is materially incomplete.
This incompleteness is indicated by census results in another way also. The
births registered during 10 years work out to a rate (in roWld figures) of 25 per
thousand people per annum. We have already noted in the last section, however,
that the count of infants in this state yielded 33 per thousand. Maybe, this
number was somewhat swollen b~ countin~ I~. month ot~ b~bi~ also, "S

78

BIRTH RATES AND DE!TH RATES

infants. But, even so, if we make allowance for the number of infants who
must have died during the year preceding the census, the census count of

infants is a clear indication that actual births must have exceeded registered
births fairly substantially.
The problem is- how are we to have a reasonably close estimate of the
actual number of births and the actual birth rate as against the registered birth
rate? There is a similar problem about deaths and death rates.
The importance of solving this probJem cannot be over-stressed. To
illustrate, the registration figures of Uttar Pradesh show that in each of the two
previous decades 1931-40 as well as 1921-30, registered Qirths were working oPt
to an average rate (in round figures) of 34 per thousand people per annum.
There is a sharp difference between 25 (the registered birth rate during 1941-50)
and 34 (at each of two preceding decades.) If this difference is real and if similar
drops were observed in other states, the figures will prove that there is no such
thing as a population problem in India; and if there was, the problem was solvmg
itself. That is, in fact, what a number of peop)e think and say. But suppose
the difference is due mcre]y to the fact that the registration system has become
less efficient than before; and so more births escaped registration during the
last decade than during two previous decades. Suppose further, that we could
form a reliable estimate of the extent of omission in different decades. Then
the inferences to be drawn from the figures will be very clifferent. Our appreciation of the problem and our approach to its solution will tum out to be very
different.

72. Uncertainties of this kind are present in every state. Among the
major states, Madras, Bombay, Madhya Pradesh and the Punjab are the or ly
four states where the registration system functions reasonably well and omissions
are not unduly large. The other states fall into three groups- those for which
figures are availabJe over a long period, though they are not very goed figures;
those for which figures (not very good) are available now for some recent Yfars
but not over a long period; and those for which there are no figurf.S at all even
now. If we exc!ude the last two categories, we are left with a territory which
contains roughly three-quarters of India's popuJation.
It was no use merely saying that we do not have complete' information and
can, therefore, come to no conclusions. It will take a long time t.cfol'c we
get data which are free from all uncertainties. Meanwhile, we have to form
as good a judgment as we can- on all the materials before us- about how the
observed growth of population as di.~closed by censuses should be split up into
binhs7 deaths, and the n,et bahmte of nU~tion. To this end, it was necessary

7?

ar~"11 :::, WiB,f'.~tiI';il'f~'~'t9St

. _ . , . • ~VaiJab1e cI8ta'tJnWri)upJ,y:~ ofbltths
• well as by the CfIJSUt aRd"'~ them to close and ~ stud~~
~
~ scrap of coUateral intbtmatien wJlich can help us to piece together this
<

lll-saw pu72le.

n· Such a study has been earned out, and it has yielded rfSJllts which

serve our present Pll1l?ose. The natvre of this study, and the r~ults, are
~t outlu detai\ 'in a self-contained paper· which is

printed as APPENDIX II to

nus t~t\. The conclusions reached in this paper may be thus stated :

1-The India picture is as follows:
(I) Births have t>ccurred (during the ten yws 1941-5°) at an average
rate of 40 per thousand per annum.
(it) Deaths have occw-red (during the ten years 1941-50) at an aVCl'age
rate of 27 per thousand per annum.
(iii) Hence, the natural increase of the population has been occurring
(during the ten years 1941-5°) at an average rate of 13 per thousnnd
per annum.
We may refer to these rates as the birth rate (40), death rate (27)
and natural increase rate (13). They relate to India within hcr
present boundaries during the decade preceding the 1951 Census.
11- The zonal variations of the India picture are as follows :
(t) The highest birth rate is found in Central India (44), and the lowest
birth rate in South India (36 or 37). The birth rates of other
zones, in order, are: West India (42), North-West India (41 or
42), North India and East India (for both of which the birth rates
are 38 or 39).
(it) The highest death rate is found in Central India (34), and the lowest
death rate in South India (21 or 22). The death rates of other
zones, in order, are: North India (27 or 28), East India (26 or
27 or 28), West India (26) and North-West India (24 or 25 or 26).
(iit) The highest natural increase rate is found in North-West India
(16 or 17) and West India (16), and the lowest natural increase
rate is found in Central India (10). The natural ~ease rates
of other zones, in order, are: South India (IS), East India (II or
12) and North India. (II) .
• The paper is not unduly technical and it ia horedi t w11l be read. A technical analysis made by
Shrl S. P. JAIN. the Census Actuary, who prepared ~ Att e and Life Table~ of tile :1'95 1 Census. is printed
a8
Ariu%u;" to thi. paper.

aD

80

Birth Rates and Death Rates
India & Zones, lJ. K., and U. S. A.

c

~1m1l••IiW
0

0

0
1"1

o

of")

~

III

0

N

0

0

o

o

o

I-

III
LII

roe
,-

XC

t-!

II:

0

Z

:!

tJ)

c

~

LlI •
~<

..J
01(

a:

oct •
a:(fJ
•

I-

z

UJ
0

:r:::l
I-

:!
c

!'

LlI •
O::J
~

OW

ZUl

<~

cn N
LlIa
t-Z

!:

I~,

<C(X

I

lII]

III

~

I

, ,,
I

-0«

I

X
UJ
Q

Z

I

11)

III
I-

en
w

I4(

-

a: a:
x
::t ....
I-

Z

0(

-

"(

IX

1&1

ID

0

<<(

a:

:t:~

.... 0

m

a:Z

o

In

oct

-

N

lC
:J

MATEIUrJITY PA'I"lUN

. 74. The foregoing figures do not represent a simple oomputation from
CensU$ data or regi5tr.ltion data or both. They are something more rompa
than a computation, they constitute a judgmeilt. They represent what the
present writEr considers to be most probably what occurred during I94I-SO
ill India 'and the six ?Ones. All the evidence which has led him to form thill
judgment i& fully set out in print; so, it is possible for rerdcrs (if they disagree
with the conclusions) to form their own ;uclgaa}t.
It will be noted that in some· cases, more than one figure have been
giveri~ this represents what seems to the present writer to I e the unavoidable
residuum Df uncertainty, which has to be accepted.
The .diagram facing this page shows the birth rates and death rates of
India. and the zones and Compares them with the rates for the United Kingdom
and the United States of America. The diagram telts its own story of the
aV'3idable waste of life occurring among us all the time.

G-

Materni~y Pattern

the birth rate vary from 44 in Central India to 36 or
37 in South India? The birth rate- by definition- is the number of births
which occur among 1,000 people during one year. But as births occur only
to married women of certain ages it is their nurr:ber which is. really relevant. It
is true that the limiting ages cannot be preci~cly laid down. It is also possible
that some births occur to women who are not married. But, where we are
striking a rate for 1,000 people, we do not base ourselves on the actual occurrences of birth among 1,000 peopl~ only, but among lakhs and even crores uf
p~oplc. We may, therefore, disregard exceptional occurrences and treat married
women of age ~5 to 44 as the people who alone are relevant in this context.
It would follow that if one part of the country contained more married
women of age IS to 44 per 1,000 people than another, then, other things be.i.QB
equal, the former would have a higher birth rate than the latter. The same would
be tIVe 9f the same territory at different times- a ~ in the proportion of
married women pf age IS to 44 would, other tbings being ~ual, be accom~
pawed by similar change in the birth rate.
76. What is the meaning rtf this escape clause- 'other things being
equal' ? In what circumBtaru;cs ,ould \\'t: have the same proportion ofmarried
WHY DOES

gz

CHAPTER II = ; ,tim' PAT1'ERII1 :OF· LIVING-I951

women of age ~5 to 44 in' different parts of the countrY (or at different times in
the same part of the country) and yet have different .birth rates? Two sets
of"circumstances may be' named. First,- the age structure within this group
may be materially different. -Thus, if we have one lakh of married women of
age :25 to 34 and another lakh of married women of age 35 to 44 drawn from the
samep8rt of the country, we may be fairly certain that the number of births occu~­
ring among the first group in the course of a year will be larger than the number
of.. births, occurring ~ong the . second group. Secondly,-it does not follow
t~ar ,if we. compared two groups of married women of the same number and the
same age-group (say 25 to 34)- but selected the groups from two different
parts of the country,. we would get the same number of babies born among them
in any' one year. Apart from purely accidental and personal differences
b¢tWeet) one woman and anot,her, it seems possible that there are statistically
significant differences between different groups of women : but why should they
be? It is difficult to be -sure- there may be something in the blood, or the
climate, and there may be more in the prevailing habits of conjugal life.
At this census we have been able to collect some information on these
matters- in part, through a local census question (which was put in some states
only); and in part, through an 'Experimental Census of Birth and Deaths'
carried out in a few states, sometime after the main cel18US was over.
Let us begin with a review of the facts which we have ascertained in
Travancpre-Cochin, about all women who have had at least -one child-birth and
'lp}z() remained manied on census day.
77. Among these mothers, those who were 45· years old or older were
separated .. The total number of children born to all of them was divided
by the total number of such mothers. The result was 6' 6. This shows that
on an average, a Travancore-Cochin mother who lives to complete her
child':'bearing period gives birth to more than 6 children but not more than 7.
OUt ,- of, this 'number (6' 6), the average number actually alive on census day
was 4' 6. Among - the children born alive 2 had died, predeceasing their
mothers. 'Let us call these figure~- the child birth index (6'6), the child
~rvivalindex (4' 6), and' the child loss index (2' 0).
'78. -These' indices relate to what may be called the completed maternity
e:1tperience. The numbers, naturally, increase gradually with age. If we
isolate all mothers of age 20 or under the chjld birth index is I' 2, the child
survival index is I' 0, and the child loss index is o· 2. The indices increase
'at, five~yearly intervals as shown in TABLE 30 on opposite page.

e2

MATERNITY' PA1'1 ERN:
TABLE

30

Ag~group

Child

Child

CIz.'ld

of
mothers

birth

iurvival

'/O$,f

ind~x

index

index

(Under 20

1'2
1,8
2'9
4'2
5'3
6'2

1'0

0'2
0'4
0,6
1"0
1'3

24
25 to 29
20 to

i 30

Incomplete
maternity
experience

to 34
I 35 to 39
L40 to 44

Completed
maternity

' i.

1'4

2'3
3"2

4'0
4'6

1,6

45 and over

6,6

4'6

2'0

AVERAGE FOR ALL AGES

4'3

3'2-

1'1

Note how the tempo of child-bearing accelerates. The addition to the
family between about 17 (the mean of the under 20 group) and about 22 (the
mean of the 20-24 group) is 0'6. Between 22 and 27, the addition is 1'1.
Between 27 and 32 it is I' 3. Then the retardation 'begins. Between 32 and
37 it is I' I. The additions to the family tend to beco~e fewer a.., age advances
after what may be called a mid-maternal age- round about age 30.
79. Information was available about the mean..." of livelihood of these
mothers. So it is possible to separate them into three' groups as members of
(i) agricultural landholders anp tenants' families, (ii) agricultural labourers
families, and (iii) non-agricultural families, It was also possible to separate
the mothers who lived in villages from those' who lived in towns.' , The child
birth indices were separately calculated for these gr~1ups and are shown below :
TABLE 31
Child birth indices
....---~

M.alernal group
Agricultural landholders and tenants'
families .
Agril.'Ulturallabourers' families

Non-agricultural famiii(."S
Rural
Urban

Age 4/j
and over

All ageJ

6'7

4'~

6'3
6,6 '

4'1

6,6

4'3
4'2

6'4

4'2

'83

CHAPTER tt :.

tltE PA1'1'ERN oF! 1:.tvtl'iG-t95t

It is sometimes stated- on the bams,niainly of European experience- that
the classes which a.l:e at.the bottom of the social ~cale have more children and
grow in number fast~. than others. There is Ihtle doubt about the place of the
agricultural labourer in the social scale anywhere in India. The figures for
agricultural" labourers' families in Travancore-Cochin do not show that this
generalisation is true in that state*. The urban index is slightly smaller than
the rural. ,But the difference is so small that it is probably not significant.
80. One other separation was effected among the mot.hers.;· those who
commenced child-bearing during ages 15 to 19 and those who commenced childbearing during ages 20 to 24. Let us call them Maternity Types A and B.
Their child birth indices differed from age-group to age-group as shown in
the table be:J.ow :
TABLE 32
Child birth iwlices

_ _--"_ ,.A____--..,

Age-group
Utlder 20

Macef"nity
Type A

Maternity
Typ'- B

1'2

24

2'0

1'3

25 \0 29
30 to 34
35 to 39
40 to 44

3'6
4'8

2'3
3'7

6'0

6·8

4'9
S'8

• 7' 3

6"4

20 to

45 and over.

''The figures of this table indicate the result to be expected if by rW&U1g
the aJrc of marriage (or by other means) the first maternity of all mothe.rs of
Type A got postponed uniformly by five years, The rcsult would be a reduction of maternity among mothers of Type A by approximately one-eighth. The
reduction in the birth rate will be even smaller, this depending on the proportion which mothers of -Typs Ii bear to the total number of mothers.
81. The child birth indices were also calculated for mothers who had
become widows by census day. It was found that on an average for all ages,
the child birrh index of widowed mothers was larger- 4' 9 agairnt 4' 3 of the
still-married, This is, of course, due to the fact that the higher age-groups
predominate among widows. The comparison for ages 45 and over yield<; 5' 5
as the index for widowed mothers against 6' 6 for mothers who remained married
on census day.
• Nor is it true ofany of tne three divisions of Mad hy& Pradesh vide para 83.

84

Logistic Graduation of tv1aternity data

LOGISTIC GRADUATION OF, MATERNITY DATA
MATERNITY TYPE A
AVEAACiE NUMBER OF CHILDREN BORN

Crosses reprasent observed values
Dofs represenf sraduoted values
62
NORTH WEST MADHYA PRADESH

SOUTH WEST MADHYA PR ... OESH

5Z

I.U
I-

IIJ
t-

4Z

0

l-

n.

a:

w37 LII

>-Ul
«

0:

~

>-\Il

c(

O

l-

II

::r:

:I:

l-

I-

0

3Z.

~

0

;,:

~

27

ZZ

8

7

6

5

17

...

.3

62

Z

TRAVANGORE-GOCHIN

2:

LL

u.

0

0

3

4

5

6

7

EAST MADHYA PRADESH

Sz.

Ul

I.U
l-

,,~

0

l-

'(

Il

UI

IU

I-

l!J

0

'(

n.

t-

li

~

>-Ul

>-

37

\II
oCt

cs:

3Z
"':,

27j
Zz.
17

8

7

6

5

4-

3
Z
..... _P"'II a_.- .. ,.,a. ....

~,...

.....0

Z
,... •• 11

"'n.r' ....

3
~I"\~ ...I

4-

5

6

7

8

LOQISTIC GRADUATION OF MATERNITY DATA
MATERNITY TYPE: B
AVERA9E NUMBER OF CHILDREN BORN

Crosses represent observed values
Dots represent 9raduated values
6Z
NoRTH WEST MADHYA PRADEsH

SOUTH WEST MADHYA PRADESH

52

UI

Ul
I-

I-

42

0
l-

0

a..

a:

a:

>Ul

UJ 31

I&J

:x:

:x:

~

0:(

l-

0

IQ,

::E
)..
I/)

c(

I-

32

0

~

::l

27

zz
17
7

6

5

4

z

TRAVANCORE-COCHIN

z

62

u.

u.

o

a

3

4

5

7

6

EAST MADHYA PRADESH

52

UJ
l-

I&J

0

UJ

LLI

I-

a

" 42 1.5

l-

~

>III

I-

«

4(

Q,

Q,

:I

>-

37

III

0:(

c(

32

27

:2
17
7

6

5

432.

0

I

Z

3

AVERAGE NUMBER OF CHILDREN BORN

4

5

6

7

, )tAt£RNnY PAt1'ltRN'

82.' :. Data {)f the Same ~tiarure as those_'i'~eWed a~: ..ere alSo Cl'1l1eoted
and compiled for three divisions of Madhya Pradtsh.! :The comparison' is
shoWn below in respect, of completed maternity experience of" ,till.,.married

mothers. (age 45 & over) :
TABLE

33
Child
birth

GuM

Cliild

survival

Natural division

index

index

loss
index

Ettst Madhya Pradesh

6· I

3'6

2',

North-West Madhya Pradesh

6'~

3'6

2'7

South-West MadhyJ Pradesh

6'6

3'6

3'0

Travancore-Cochin

6·6

4'6

2'0

Two features of this table are noteworthy:
Firsl,~ It will be seen

that the number of children borne by mothers
aged 45 and over is not higher in any of the divhions of Madh.ya Prade~h than in
Travancore-Cochln. In fact, the figure is slightly smaller in two divi.;ioIlS of
Madhya Pradesh. Yet there is·no d,)ubt that the birth rate in Madhya Pradesb·is
very distinctly higher than in Travancore~Cochin. It is dearly verifiablo that tho
difference is caused by d.iff~rcnccs in the proportion of ,married wom~m of
different age-groups to,the total population.
'
.

Secondly,- The child loss index is unmistakably higher in rrll th~ ,three
divisions of Madhya Pradesh than in Travancore-Cochin. This fact is' hi: accord
With much other evidence which points to MadhYd Pradesh as having a very
hi~ death rate.

83. A comparative study of the figures of Madhya. Pradesh with, .those
of Trava,ncore-Cochin indicates that the features already noticed in TravancoreCochin are aiso observable in Madhya Pradesh divisions. The tendency for the
tempo of child-birth to accelerate until a mid-maternal age is reached arid then'
to relax ~ age advances, is clearly observed. In general, the· 'rural(urbart differentials' and '8()cial class differentials' do nor appear to be inlporrilnt. > There
is a diminution in the total number of children bom when the age of commence . .·
ment of child-birth is postponed, but the difference is not very striking.
'
':" 11. Pl&y Qe .QJ.el)tioned that a SRlllple eaquiry made in ,villages, In.,tWQ
groups of districts of West Bengal also brought out data which exhibit 'die .~

&5

CJiAmR It:

THE PATTERN OF UVING-.t95t

features. The child birth index of mothers aged 45 and over came out to be
6' 3 in both groups of districts.
. The extent to which the census figures of Travancore-Cochin and Madhya
Pradesh divisions, as well as the sample enquiry figures of West Bengal might
be affected by error has not been studied in detail. It is noticed, however,
that they hang together so well as to justify confidence. In general, it may be
observed that there is little likelihood of significant error in the child survival
index. It is practically certain that the child birth indices are not overstated.
At older ages, some women may have forgotten to count the number of children
borne by them, completely. The true figures might, therefore, be somewhat
higher than those given above. But judging from the graphs furnished in the
diagrams given earlier in this section it seems likely that the allowance required
to be made on account of such error is probably not large.

r For fuller information on all these data, reference may be made to the
brochure on 'Maternity Data-I95I Census' issued as Census of India Paper
NO.5 of I953. Some extracts arc also given in ApPENDIX II.]
84. Information of this kind is not available for many countries of the
world. But very detailed data have been published for the United Kingdom
among the papers accompanying the Report (issued in the year 1949) of the
Royal Commission en PopUlation. The relevant figures of that country have
been extracted and included for reference in ApPENDIX VII.

~\J :ffti)ould seem that the child birth index, i.e., average number of live births per
mother after completion oJ her child-bearing period, exceeded six- in much the
same way as in India-for those mothers of the United Kingdom who married in or
about1860. The index has fallen steadily since. It was reduced to 4'0 for
women who married in the firsl decade of this century and is now about Z· 4 or not
more than two-fifths of the figures observed in different parts of India. It will
be noted that the relation between the India Birth Rate (40) and the U. K. Birth
Rate (16) is more or less of the same order.

85. There is anotber-. and even more instru<;:tive- way in which the
salient features of the materruty pattern can be expressed.
Out of all the births which take place during one year, how many are
first births, how many are second births, how many a,re third births, and h9W
many are births of the fourth and higher order? In a paper* published in
195 1 by Shri S. P. JAIN, these questions have been answered on the basis of an
• "A trudY of birth order ,'.Hatiu of India" publJalled in the Indiem 1011mQ1 of M«lieol R~"
No. 39. ~ril J9SI}.
8~

MATERNITY PATTERN

analysjs of registration data in thirty municipal towns of India. The 'Experi ..
mental Census of Births and Deaths' has yielded some more data for 27 district
of South India, 7 districts of West India, 22 districts of Central India- and 5
districts of North-West India. These data relate to the population as a wholcincluding villages and towns-people in due proportion.
The results are showi1 in the table below :
TABLE

34

Number per 1,O(}() birThs which arc

--..

r-

First
births

Second
births

Third
births

FourTh births
and birth~_ lif
Ilighcr order

228

21 5

181

376

209

180

r67

444

210

189

162

439

North-W cst India
23 1
(5 DISTRICTS)
Thirty Municip:.lI Towns
of India
209

206

15 1

4[2

196

16 7

428

South India
(27 DISTRICTS)
West India
(7 DISTRICTS)
Central India
(22 DISTRICTS)

The figures hang together very well indeed and then.:! is little doubt that
we may place confidence in the correctness of the picture which emerges.
South India presents a slightly different pattern from West, Central and NorthWest India, but the difference is consistent with the known difference,") in
birth ratcs. Speaking generally, first bjrths account for rathcr more than oncfifth of all births ; sccond bjrths account for very nearly another one-fifth; third
births accormt for about onc-sixth of all births; well over two-fifths of all births
are fourth birth,) or births of a higher order. We can put the matter even
more simply.
The total number of births which occur in the course oj one year
among about 1,000 people oj India is 40. Among these 40 births, 8 births are first
births ,. 16 births are either first births or second births,. 2-1 births are either firse,
second or third births,. and 17 births out oj 40 are either fourth births or births
of higher order.
86. For reasons which should - be sufficiently obvious and which we
shall discuss in the last chapter of thls report, we may refer to births occurring
to mothers who have already given birth to three or more children as 'improvident

87

CHAPTER II : . t~ PATTfJiN -09 .J:,.IVING-I 95 1

mcttemilY' ()XCept in the altogether exceptional circumstance where ~ previowt,Jy
born _children are dead). We may refer to the percentage of such maternjties
to all births as the 'Incidence ()f Improvident Maternity'. - It is extremely ·important that the attention of the people should be focusied on tlUs factor- llu
TABLE
incidence of improvident maternity.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _3_5________
Incidence
of

im!:~::::;

The figures for all those countries of
the world for which this information
is available have been extracted and

furnished in ApPENDIX VII. It will
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - be seen that the latest figures
Counrry

India .
U.S.A ..
U.K. .
France .
Germany
(FEDERAL RIlPUBLIC)

Japan .

compare as shown in TABLE 35.
In most of these co U n t ric s,
moreover, the incidence of improviI2'3

dent maternity js steadily decreasing. Weare not aware of any
evidence that this is happening JD
India.

NUMBER OF FIRST BIRTHS, SECOND BIRT HS"
THIRD BIRTHS, FOURTH AND HIGHER ORDER
BIRTHS OUT OF 1,000 BIRTHS
IN INDIA, U. K. AND U. S. A.
soo~----------------------------------------~

INDIA

U.K.

FIRST BIRTHS

SECOND BIRTHS

TH1RD BIRTHS

FOURTH AND
HI~HER ORDER

81R1HS

Sex and Household Economic Status

C
..J

o

J:

UJ
Ul

.J

o

111-

01(01(
a:_

:J

t-Q

Zz
o

J:

o
z

4:
X

<
a

z

w
\1)(1)

l-

I

UI
III

>tCDc(

I

-C

<l

(/)1-

. Z en

00
t/)-

a:~

Z

wO

a.Z

0

00(.)

0(

oUJ

c

0"

:z:

z

t:J

o

LL.

lfI

o
z
o

~
Q

I-

Z

::l

llfI

m

-

0(

a:

III

I-

-otn

:!
Q

Z
%

t-

a:

~
o
o

o

'"

It)

o
o

o

.;

,
I

~

::J

,

....................
o...

-

Agricultural Classes
bv, Sex and Household Erol101nir Status

o
z
<
x
w·
en

~
.J

II)

<<(

w

1[-

... 0

zz;

tJ)
(/)

wCJ

~

..J

°Ul

..J:J

<Ia:«

.~II~m1[:J
I

I

:JI-

I

I

t-(/)

50

-az
-

~

o~

-0
a:

z
o
<to
eJ

u.w
a
o
t/)...J
Zo

)I(

W
Q

Z

0:r

tIlw

ffiUl
0..:J

:x:

....

:::I

C
III

o

O:r

o
o

0'"
LL.

t-

III

o

<

III

z
o
I::l

m

tt
r-

otil

o
o

o
III"

o
o

0"

V

o

o
,.f

Non-agricu 1tural Classes
by Sex and Household Economic Status

o

z
0(
><

W

fJJ

~

en
UJ
en
CJ)

«

..J

(.)

...J
c(Ul

D::l

c

is

::JI-

z

~~

tii

w

:Jt/)

~

(.)

0
a:_

«
-

t!1~

1-0
Zz

o

00

Zo

z

-

u. UJ
0 0

tI)...J
ZO
0::t

«

Q

z

t/)W
D:tf)

:r

....

:J

UJ:::J
0

o

0.

UI

O:I:

o

a0 ....

C
Q

z

LL

o
z

o
t-

::l

m

-

....at/):

-Q

a

a
o

o
o

U1

V"

"

o

a

a

"

M

o
o

"

Livelihood Classes - India & Zones - General Population

IiiIII

Ul'

~c

&II

1-

xC

Z

l-Z
Ir-

o

o
Z

N

olt

-o~

J

~c
a:_
1-0
zz·

Z
-..::".

111U

en
W

(/)

til

~

~

Q

Z

..J

o
O~
0;:
o oC(

lUI
III

~

;E_J

~

o

.J::J

Wo..

>0

JQ.

z

-

)-..1
m~
\I)

LI! Jl II: III If M'. 'Ie ~ 1IC 'lC .. k)l • Ie 11M

«

a:

UJ

'II: II: •

It II: 'II; s rt X • IIC IC

._!_ ....

Zz

o UJ

~(,-

w

n.
a

o
o

.. 11' . . . . . . . l1li . . . . "

C
Q

0'"

Z

La.

o
z
o

••••••

C

I-

• ~•• J1 .....

Q

:::l
CD

Z

::s::
t-

a:

o::

o
z

I-

-o

tI)

o

o

III
"I

U)

o

o

.

o

U)

o
o
o

iii"

o
o
o

'to"

g
o

o
o
o

M

N

.

..

o
o

o

"'

o

Livelihood Classes - India & Zones - Rural Population

~

w

z
o

I

I

I

I

I

I

t

I

I
I

I
i

I

,
I

I

I

:

I

.......
.... ~

"

N

~~~~

of!

-.;:z

-oZ«

'C-l()

UJ

en

~

t'I

1.1

"

l

Q

!§ :: ~ ~
III

)(

.~

IIJ

...j

o

1-0

zz

! • •BBOID
I

I

:

I
I

I
t

I
I

I
•

I

I

I

I

...;C::::S1~

...J

] ~~ ~

(.)

o

Oz

00
~~

LLI-

U

:

en

«

..I

«
a::_

III

u

'"

o
z

""o

m

Q

~ =~ ~

....~

.J«
LIJ.J

>::t

-0...J
O
)-0.
al...J
(/)oe(

Za:

Q:J
(/)0::

-

~

o

Z

a:

,...::t

Q..

en

::I

LIJ

o

a
o
0"
o

"Qz
I-

ll.

o
z
o

-

~

III

t-

!
D
!

ii:

Ii

:l
CD
t-

U)

::r

I

o
)

I~
I'

C

.

CI
C

.:...

I"

n

Livelihood Classes - India & Zones - Urban Population

X

l(_Ii(" "

(j)'

~

)<

KKK

,,)( )(

" • x_ X •

X • "- K_-" •

"

w

"

"

.. ..

....

11)

I1J

'-"

o

:z:z

.... -

N

IX

0
Z

~

-c«

'II:

',It

',II(

')(

)(

z

)(

x )( lIC )It '" lit

)(

.J

IX_

tf)

11J-

lC ')I(

)('

)I(

)f

M.

•.

X

.... 0

)I(

')C

x

JI(

)(

'I(

· .

,,"
~

,'\.

,'\.

Zz

~

U

W

]I(

.'

,"'" ,'" ,,"

««

-C-

-

:

~:!
'0

Z

tf)

tf)

«

•• x

)(

)(

)(.

•

)( K I(

JC

I(

•

•

x )(
" " ......
..
. , .....
)I(

«
£5

...J

o

.:

l(

.

~

~

....

Q

Ul

Oz

I1J

~

00

X ....

.J«

04

UJ..J

>::J
-0..
...J

)I.

O

)(

J(

)I(

~

'It

X

)( )(

••

x

• x "

)(

JC

X )(

.,

-

IXl Z

Ul«
zm

.. ....

a:i

Z

>--0..

X "

,.

jI(

x

)It'

"

)(

)(

"

.

•

)(

"" • x x

)(

x "

•

0

tf):J

K

-

~

a:

muD

:r
,...

UJ

:::I

0

0..

Ul

o
o
0 ...
o

.

"

x )( Ii( J(

x x •

)It

iii' IC

II(

Ie )(

JtJC.xx.x . . . . . . . "

...... " ."

"

<C

0

-Z....

LL

Ii: ~'\......_" ~'\.'\.'\.'\.'\.'\.,'-'\......_'\.'\."

~,'\.'\.

<C
iii

It' .. M •

Dr • " "

I-

.;:..." ;:ss.

~i

en

a
z
o

III: II )( •

... JI )(

:It J( lit ,.. )C ..

JI'

I(MlI(.III • • • •

..

<C

::J

0

co

-

Z

-:
a

~

:r

I-

IX

t-

iii

0
Z

\()

c

o
n
o

U'I"

o
o

o

v"

o

o

o
o

o
o

I"'l"

N"'

8o

-'"

I

o

1

I
I

:
I

'
I

I

1
I

1

I

:

I

:

I

I

I

I

:

I
I

:
I
,~

I

I

I
I

I
I

:
I

I,

I

I

I

I

I

I

':-.,S

~...:~~~~~~~

a ~

z~:q~~~~::

- u
'b
o
o

«

00::

_HBIIID~§OB

~~~~~~~~
....~

Employers, Employees,
and Self-employed persons (Independent Workers)
and persons not economically active

DISTRIBUTION OF 10,000 SELF-SUPPORTING PERSONS IN
NON-AGRICULTURAL POPULATION BY EMPLOYERS, EMPLOYEES,
INDEPENDENT WORKERS AND PERSONS NOT ECONOMICALLY ACTIVE
7,000
NORTH INDIA

INDIA

~

~
~

NORTH-WEST
INDIA

~:;

6,000

~

~r-

~\:

EAST INDIA

~

~

~
~

~
5,000 r-'-- ~ f--'~.'- ~ ~"--- -,
~

WEST INDIA

~

SOUTH INDIA

~

3,000 -

~ .

~
~

~

~ ::.:::
~ ~

~

~

~~

~~

f-.----

~

h~ fa ~

~
~~

II~

--~

~

~

I

~~

~

~

~

~

~~ ~~ I~ ]1

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~
~~

~

~
~
~
~

I,~ ~ ~.~ ~ ~~II
~

~

~
~
~

~

~
~

~

~
~

~

~~
~

~

~._
~

~

INDEX

Emplo.!Jers _____
___________ ~
Emplo.!/ees _________________ _II
Independent If'orkers __ _______ ~

£conomical{J I'nacllj,e __________ 1§

-

~

~~

~

~

~

~

~~

~

~

~

~ ~

~
~

~

~~

~

~

~
~
~
~

~

~
~

0:

~
~
~ ~

~

~

~
~

~

~

~

~

~

~

X

~

~
~

~

'.,000 I--

~

~

~

I

I~

~~

~

~

~
\\

~

~~

~
~~

~

~

~
~

~
2,000

~

~ 1\

~
~--

;s:

~

~~ ~~

~
~
~

a~

~~

~

~
~
~

~
~

~

~

~

~

~

~

4,000

~

CENTRAL
INDIA

~

~

~.~
~

Divisions of Industries and Services
India, North India, Central India and North-West India

I
11)( I( )( I( )( )()( )( )( )( )( I( IC

.c
Q

I:: : : .' : " .;'.'." : .' : : : .' :." ::.' :.' : .. ,' , ' :, ':, ','. ': : :

z

-

11111111111111111111'

,'""'"'"'"'""''~

~ 10.."'""'' '"' '",,,,,\,,,,,,'"'\"'''''''''~~"""0..'\.'""''''''-: '0.."'''''''''''\'\'-'\'\'-'
LII

~I

1IIImili 111111111111111111

:z:
Ia:

ffi!HHE

~~~~~

0

z

,.,
\l

~

r
~

, I..

o IJ

')( x )( )( " )( x )( )I( )( )( )( )( )(

Q

I: .'.'.': ::: ::,' ,':: ::.":.'.'.'.'::.'.':::.

Z

WIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
..J

III '!:!

!0_"""~"~~-0..""""""""""~~"""""""'''''''''''''

4(

cr

I-

>
t
IJ
0,-,

1IIIIITITlllTTn III

Z

w

0
RoI~~

~~""'''''','\''-'\,\'',\,'\,'\,,-,,\,,,,,,,,,,,,~~,\'\.,-,~~~

1
[II "

)(

)(

)(

J(

)(

x

)(

)(

)(

)(

~

)(

)I(

)( ..

1::::,',.,'." .. .','.'.':.'.',' ,':::.'::::::

5

1111111111111111111111

Q

Z

)II(

10,.",,,,,\,\,,,,\,\,,,,,,,,,,,,,\,-\.\." '\'\'\"''\'\'"'"'"'\'"'\'\'"'"'"'"'"" " '"'\'\'"'\'"'\'"'\'"'\'\

J:
I-

11111111111111 III 111111111111111

a:

0

Z

~~,,~~~~~~~~~

I
L
I)()()()()(

Ii()()(

)C)It)(

)(

J()(

J(

I()(

, ............. ...............
..', .........
" ..................

[IIllllllllllllllllllllI

~~,,'\.,,""w

~

Q

-z

..

•

11111111111 1111111111111111111

~~ ~,,\,,\,'\,,,,,'\.,-,,-'\.,-'\.,\'\.,\,,\,,-,,\,,\,,\,~,,,,~,,,,~,,~

o

o
0"
N

o
o

It)

"

8o
..

o

o

U)

-~

Z I;)

o- "lIJ

o

Divisions of Industries and Services
India, East India, South India and West India

<'
-

.J

<
a:

°z

:::l

-a
c(

~:

)(

)(

~'\.~,

I/)

~

1111111 111111111111111111111

LLI

~

I\.~~'\."'~~''',"''''''''''''''''''~~",",",~~",",~~~~

~O«

]

z tn
0-<
z>-0
Q

1)( l(

)C

K )( )( )(

OOZ

Ii(

)(

)(

x

W )(

.... ' ..... , .. ,"
'

1:

III:

Z)-I-

-z

(/')

"

1111111 IllHlllUlillWlIllJ

-l- """"""""" ~"""",,"'"""''"'""""""'\."'\.~

a:U)O
t!JZ
Z

u.

)I

:::::: ::::::::: :::::::::::

Z

I....
.Ju.Ul
:JOW

9

aD

I .

I II II 1( )( X • X )( )( 1( II )(

-0

Oal::J

tncno
a: (f)

:t

UJ LLl
D.. (.)

0
III

)('

'K 'X

f""""'\ """""""""ill & '\.'\.'\" " " " " " "-~"""""""""~
111111111111 11111I1111111I1II1ll

:l

,,>c
z 0:: Z

')(

"

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIUI

....

«"

J(

, ' . , , ' ..
......... " ' , , . '" .........

~",",",",",~~",",~",~""~""""~",","~~~~~","~

m

UJ

~tf) ....

I

OO(/)
n.Z<C
Q,<t UJ

1~1(

x~".~"

)lI(X)()(X><)()(,

~.':

::: :::::: ::::::::.

cncn<
IUJ
O
LL a: z

<
-

WillllIllLLlllllJlill

z

:\\.""""\S:\\.'""""'0:"'_""""""""""""""""""",,""""

....

m~tf)
OOUl
O z Q
- :>
0" z ex:

«
LIJ

lill IIIWlllilllWlli

:::J

"

0

.J t- c-

III

~~~~~~

Q-UJ
u.(f)cn
aUlo

I
L~X')('x"xxx

Ulz
Z(/)<

11111111111111111111111111

0«
-_J(J)

-0 ~""""""~" ~
c(

tn

~

Q

....

o

""

&~~~~~

Z

:J
_
""OUJ
al
ex:

-a::

x )( x " )()()(

F:·', '.', .,'. '.':::::::::::":::::::::::

....

..

11I1I1I11 11111111111111111 II I

~,~~~~~~~

::J

Z

o

o
III

N~

o
o
o

"

N

o

o

III

"

o
o

o'I

o

o
II)

o

CHAPTER III

Livelihood Pattern-I 95 I
A -

India Picture

a steady supply of staple foodgrains and a faw
E other foodstuffs. needs
This is needed every day, day after day, all the year
VERY HOUSEHOLD

round; otherwise the people carmot live.
A few other goods are almost equally indispensable- fuel to cook the foodstuffs, cloth, and so on. Mter this, there is a considerable variety. Some
families get and use a great many goods and services; others manage with very
little.
All these goods and services may be described as 'means of living' . Some
families get the greater part of their 'means of living' directly- when they cultivate the land and grow their own food. Even they have to get an income in
the form of money in order to buy the other 'means of living'. Familes which
do not grow their own food, get income wholly in money which they use to buy
all their 'means of living'. We use the term 'livelihood' to mean both types
of incom.- in kind as well as in money.
A few families (much fewer than is supposed) get their 'livelihood' without anyone having to work for it. Subject to this exception. one or two or
more people in every family have got to do some work or other in order to earn
the livelihood needed by the family. We use the expression' Means of Livelihood'
to mean the work, by which livelihood is earned; and, in the exceptional
circumstances where an unearned income is obtained, the nature of such
unearned income.
We put questions and ascertained in respect of every man, woman, and
child whom we counted, what his or her 'means of livelihood' was. The records
containing this information for about 3 lakhs of people in the Punjab were destroyed by fire. About the rest- numbering 3,S661akhs- we have got a complete
account. The information has been sorted and compiled into Economic Tables.
The Economic Tables of the 1951 Census show- ror the country as a whole,
for ~ S18tel nal\lllLl djv~jonl distrl~ an~ the dilerent parts of the district-

8?

CHAPTER III:

UVELIHOOD PATTERN-I9SI

how many people there are who obtain their livelihood in one or other of several
different ways all of which are classified on an identical basis throughout the
country. By grouping the people in this way according to their means of livelihood we get categories, classeS, sub-classes, sections, divisions and sub-divisions.
This is a complete economic classification of the people. A full explanation
of the definitions and classifications will be found in APPENDIX III. This paper
also contains a detailed review of the data, together with a discussion of possible
errors and defects in them. In this chapter, a brief account is given in simple
terms without entering into unduly technical discussions.
2. Non-earning dependants- Out of the total of 3,5661akhs, 2,I431akhs of
people (or 60' I per cent) have been classified as 'non-earning dependants'.
They do not take any part in
TABLE I
procuring their own livelihood. In
the main, they consist of women
Non-earm'ng dependan18 and children who are supported
Number ,.J.
by the husband and father or
(IN LAKHS) Percentage other b rea d-w inn e r of the
household. They do not, however,
include
those women and children
Rural males
45'0
who take part in the cultivation
Urban males
45'6
of land as unpaid family helpers.
Rural femaLs
1, 065
73'5
TABLE I shows the rural/urban and
88' I
Urkn females
sex-wise break up of non-earning
dependants. The percentages are
60'1
TOTAL
2,143
such as might be • expected.
Non-earning dependency among
females must naturally be substantially higher than among males. It
is higher among urban females than among rural females mainly because the
latter lend a hand in cultivation while the former do not have that opportunity.
Non-earning dependency is a shade higher among urban males than among
rural males. It mayor may not be significant.

3. Earning dependants- There are 379 lakhs of people (or 10'6 per cent
of the total number) who are classified as 'earning dependants'. They are
dependants in the sense that-left to themselves- they cannot support themselves. They are also, in the main, women or grown-up children; but they
are not 'non-earning dependants" either because they earn some income which
is sufficient to meet part of the cost of their maintenance or else they are unpaid
family helpers in cultivation (or other business, like handloom weaving for
90

INDIA PICTURB

instance, by which the livelihood of the family is earned). In the latter
case, their participation is so limited that they are not regarded as earning
the full cost of their maintenance thereby. If, however, they take a more
effective part they would not be classified as 'earning dependants', but as 'selfsupporting persons'.
TABLE 2 shows the rural/urban and sex-wise break-up of 'earning
dependants'. These figures show that 'earning dependants' are relatively
TABLE 2
unimportant in towns- both in
absolute number and percentage.
~_!;~endanu 1 This is true of both males and
Numbef'
females. It is in villages, and
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _{_IN_L_AKH_s_)_P,_er_r:en
__
tOl_' more especially among village
Rural-males
119
7"9
women, that considerable numbers
6
Urban males
15
4.
are found, and the work of
Rural females
232
16 ·0
13
4" 5
earning dependants
makes 8
Urban females
significant contribution to the
10"6
TOTAL
379
procurement of the livelihood of
the family.

4" Self-supporlins: persons- Everyone who is not a dependant is classified
as a 'self-supporting person' which means : he (or she) procures an income
which is at least sufficient for his (or her) own maintenance. As the entire
cost of maintenance of non-eaming dependants and part of the cost of maintaining earning dependants has to be ~ met by self-supporting persons, it is
evident that most of them procure an income which is substantially in excess
of the actual cost of their own maintenance.
There are, in all, I,044 Iakhs of self-supporting persons, or 29-3 per cent
of the total number. TABLE 3 shows the rural/urban and sex-wise break-up
of these I,044 lakhs. On the
TABLE 3
whole, women number rather less
Self-supporting /'ef'som
than one in six among all selfr Number A
.......
supporting persons. In villages
(IN LAKHS) Percentage they are more than one in six, but
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - less than one in five. In the towns,
Rural mal
706
47'1
es
166
49'S
they are nearer one in eight.
Urban males.
lSI
10·4
We may, for the present, leave
Rural females
Urban females
21
7'4
the dependants out of consideration.
We shall return to them at the
TOTAL
29·3
• 1.044
end of tbis 8 e c t ion. 0 u:r
91

CHAPtER III:

LIVELIHOOD PATTERN-I95t

jmmediate purpose is to follow up these 1,044lakhs of self-supporting persons
and ascertain what exactly they do in order to get a living.
.

5. There is, first, a broad division. Out of 1,044 lakhs, 710 lakhs (or 68' I
per cent) are 'agriculturists'; and 334lakhs or (31 '9 per cent) are 'non-agriculturists', The distinction between the two is simple, Anyone whose inCome is
derived from the cultivation of land (whether this be in the form of net profits
of cultivation, or of wages for employment as cultivating labourer, or of rent
received by virtue of vested rights by a non-cultivating land-holder) is classified
as an 'agriculturist'. All other self-supporting persons are classified as 'nonagriculturists', It may happen, of course, that some self-supporting persons
may be .in receipt of income of two different varieties. In such cases, that
income which is the larger of the two is taken into consideration for purposes
of classification as agriculturist or non-agriculturist.
The rural/urban and sex-wise break-up of agriculturists and nonagriculturists is shown below:

4

TABLE

Self-supporting persons
~----------~--------~

Agriculturists

Number

Number

(IN LAKHS) Percentage

Rural males
Urban males

•

Rural females

•

Urban females
TOTAL

N o~-agriculturists

(IN LAKHS)

Percentage

566

80'2

140

19'8

19

11'4

147

88'6

121

80'2

30

19'8

4

19'7

17

80'3

710

68'1

334

3 1 '9

The figures of thls table should help to correct some misconceptions.
It is not seldom supposed that 'rural' and 'agricultural' mean more or
·less the same thing; or that 'urban' and 'non-agricultural' are very nearly
identical. This is not correct, Roughly, one among every five st!l£-supporting
persons in villages (male as well as female) is a non-agriculturist, Among
self-supporting males in towns, one in nine is an agriculturist. The ratio is
even higher among self-supporting females; but this is unimportant, be~\1OO
~

. tNbt..\ Picritirlt

tbdr absoiute number is quite small.

One

might suppose that the
agriculturists in towns must be non-cWtivating landholders who live on
rent. This
not correct. ~ we shall see presently, the number of
agricultural rentiers livjng in villages as well as towns is a very much smaller
fraction of the total number of all agriculturists in the country. Cultivation is
carried on the periphery of all towns. Some cultivators and even cultivating
labourers live there. The proportion of such people is very small in the cities
and major towns, but is qwte considerable in the minor towns and
townships,

is

m

6. Let us leave the non-agriculturists for a time, and follow up our 710
lakhs of agriculturists. They are divided into four classes as below:
TABLE 5

Percentage
Percentage

of all

Number

agricul-

(iN LAKHS)

turists

seljsupporting
persons

I-Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
owned

457

64·4

43'S

II-Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
un-Oflmed

88

12'3

8'4

III -Cultivating labourers

149

21'0

14'3

IV-Non-cultivating owners of land; and
other agricultural rent receivers

16

2'3

1 '6

7 10

100'0

6S'I

Livelihood Class

.

TOTAL

,

0/ all

The figures .of this table bring out clearly the relative numerical importance
of the four classes into which agriculturists have been clivided.

7. Among the four classes, Livelihood Class IV (whom we shall refer to as
'agricultural rentiers' for short) is numerically insignificant. This class includes
two quite different types of people referred to as 'non-cuItivating owners
of land' and 'other agricultural rent receivers'. In popular imagination, the.
proprietors of zamindaris and other estates come first. They are the people
referred to to as 'other agricultural rent. .receivers'. This is a better
description of such people than 'non-cultivating owners of land'- because their
legal rights over the whole or greater part of the cultivated land in the estate are
strictly limited to the receipt of a rent (which may not be changed except by

93

CHAPTER III:

UVELIHOOD PATTERN-I951

prescribed statutory processes). They are disentitled to enter on such lands
for purposes of cultivation even if they wanted to, These people are 'agricultural rentiers' by legal prescription; not necessarily by choice. The~ is
another, and clearly distinguishable type of agriculturists who are referred to as
'non-cultivating owners of land'. These are the people referred to as 'raiyats'
in raiyatwari villages, permanently settled zamindari villages and also other
villages under certain varieties of miscellaneous special tenures. There are
also the people who are called 'tenants' in temporarily settled zamindari villages
and villages under similar tenures- who possess a permanent and heritable
right of occupancy in the land held by them for purposes of cultivation. Most
of these people may cultivate their own land, in which case they are put in Livelihood Class I.
Some of them who, for one reason or another, find it necessary
or convenient to entrust the cultivation of their land to others on an undertaking
to pay rent, would be agricultural rentiers temporarily, by voluntary decision
and not by legal necessity. How many of each of these two types are included
in the India total of 16 lakhs is not known definitely. But judging from their
territorial distribution, there can be little doubt that the raiyat-tenant type of
rentier is much more numerous than the zamindar type.•
All of them, taken together) add up only to 2' 3 per cent of all agriculturists
and 1'6 per cent of all self-supporting persons.
8. Livelihood Classes I and II comprise all the cultivators. Livelihood
Class III includes all the cultivating labourers. It is necessary clearly to grasp
the fact that there is a distinction between the two; and appreciate precisely
what the distinction is. This point is stressed because there ici a great deal
of discussion about land reform; and one often finds that the words 'kisan',
'peasant', 'tiller of the soil' and so forth are used, sometimes in a restrictive
sense to. denote particular groups among agriculturists (often not the same
groups) and sometimes the words are used as if they were synonyms for 'agriculturists'. It is so difficult to be sure about what is being proposed or opposed.
The census figures distinguish the 'cultivating labourer' as an employee
of a cultivator, whose business merely is to perform physical labour in the manner
required by the cultivator. The cultivator is the manager of cultivation- he is
the person who decides how and when or where the various operations of cultivation should be undertaken, and who sees to it that they are properly undertaken. He is the person who accepts the risks of cultivation. The nature of
• One of the pitflills for the unwary enquirers abcut llind tenure. is tlae fact the lame name meanl
different things in different places and different names mean the same thing. ODe of these pitfalls i. the
Ule of the word 'zamindar·. It stands for someone in the Punjab and an altogether different t)'pe oC
person ia Bibar and Welt SenFI.

94

INDIA PICTURE

the income obtained by these cultivators is quite different from that of the cultivating labourer. The cultivator gets the 'net profits of cultivation,' i.e., what
remains of the produce of the land after expenses are met. The cultivating
labourer gets 'agricultural wages'. The livelihood of the cultivating labourer
is part of the expenses of cultivation.
There are, it will be observed, only I49lakhs of cultivating labourers against
545 lakhs of cultivators- very little more than one in five. This shows that
the number of cultivators who employ cultivating labourers in addition to or
in lieu of the labourperfonned by themselves and members of their families must
be relatively small.
9. Having thus distinguished cultivators from cultivating labourers, we
make a further distinction among cultivators, one being put in Livelihood Class I
and the other in Livelihood Class II. It would be simple and convenient to
refer to these two classes as 'owner-cultivators' and 'tenant-cultivators'; but
great care was taken to avoid using these expressions at the census enumeration
because they were liable to cause misunderstanding of the true nature of the
distinction we sought to make. Our idea of 'owner-cultivator' is one which
includes the 'occupancy tenants' of Uttar Pradesh along with the 'raiyats' ot
the raiyatwari vHlages of Bombay and Madras and the 'raiyats' of the pennanently settled zamindaris of Bihar. They are all 'owner-cultivators'- because
the term 'owner' (if it is legitimately applicable to any type of holder of cultivated
land) must be applied to that person who has the right to remain in possession
of it) use it for cultivation and bequeath it to his heirs for a like purpose. The
use of the term 'tenant-cultivator' must be limited to cultivators who hold the
land they cultivate, for a strictly limited period, and are not owners thereof
in the sense explained above.
There is one more reason wby the terms 'owner-cultivator' and 'tenantcultivator'- though apparently simple and convenient- were not used at the
stage of enumeration. It is obviously possible that a person may cultivate at
one and the same place some plots of land which are owned by him and other
plots which be may have rented from someone else who owns them. In such
a case, the test is- which of the two gives him the larger income. If the former,
he is included in Livelihood Class I. If the latter, he is included in Liveli
hood Class II.
Now that we have explained the distinction clearly and the:-e is no danger
of the census going wrong because of confuSion of local names, we shall refer
to Livelihood Class I or 'cultivators of land wholly or ma.in1y owned' 88

9'

citAl'TER 111:

LiVEi.ntOOD P:A:ri'EtriJ-1:9~t

owner-cultivators; and Livelihood Class II or 'cultivators of land wh()lly or
mainly un-lJf.lJ1U!d' as tenant-cultivators,
There are 545 lakhs of cultivators, Among them, owner-cultivators number
457 lakhs and tenant-cultivators number only 88 lakm,
The preponderance of 'owner-cultivators' is the most important and
characteristic feature of our agricultural-class-structure, As we shall see
presently this statement is true not merely of raiyatwari areas but it is true to
an even greater extent of the permanently settled and temporarily settled
zamiodari areas as well,
10, We may now tum to the 334 lakhs of self-supporting non-agriculturists

and ascertain the manner in which they obtain their livelihood,
be divided into four sections as below :

They too may

TABLE 6

Percentage
of all
Percentage
of all
self-supporting
selj-supf Number
mm-agriporting
(IN LAKHS) culturists
persons

Employers
Self-employed persons other than employers
,
Employees
Non-agricultural rentiers, pensioners and
miscellaneous income receivers
TOTAL

II

3'3

165
148

49'4

10
334

44'3
3'0

-100'0
-

1'1
15'7
14'2
0'9

-31'9

II, The last of the four sections includes a variety of people as

shown

below:
(i) Persons living principally on income derived from ownership "Of
non -agricultural property;
(it) Persons living principally on pensions, remittances, scholarships
and funds;
(iil) Inmates of jails, asylums, alms-houses and recipients of doles;
(ifl) Beggars and vagrants ; and
.
(v) All other persons living principally on income derived from DOnproductive activity,

wi! picii.rR:!
The figures returned under some of these items are surprisingly small. But
it should be borne in mind: first, that the figures relate only to self-supporting
persons and do not include their dependants; and secondly, that persons whose
principal income is derived in some other way, but who may also derive secondary
income in one or other of the ways mentioned above are not included.
12. The low ratio

of 'employers' stands out. They are only about one
in hundred among all self-supporting persons and rather less than one in
thirty among all self-supporting non-agriculturists. This is all the more
remarkable because the definition of employers was comprehensive and induded
everyone who employed even one person- provided only that the latter was
employed for purposes of carrying on the business or profession by which the
employer earned his livelihood. [No one was to be classified as an employer
merely because he had domestic servants.] As this is the first time when statistics of employees, other self-employed persons and employers were collected,
it is impossible to compare them with. previous figures. There is no good reason
to suppose that any appreciable number of employers were wrongly included
in any of the other sections.

13. Non-agricultural employees, it will be observed, form a distinctly
larger proportion of non-agriculturists than cultivating labourers among
agriculturists. They are nevertheless a clear minority. Self-employed
persons (other than employers) are, on the other hand, more numerous than
employers and employees combined.
If we deduct rentiers from both sides (16 lakhc; from agriculturists
and 10 lakhs from non-agriculturists), we get the following classification of
income-earners with reference to the nature of the income earned by them:
TABLE

7
Number (IN LAKHS) of Income earner,
rIndustries
Cultivation and services Total

Nature of Income

Net profits
Wages and salaries
TOTAL

545
149

176
148

1.91

694

32 4

r,or8

72.1

Earners of profits- it may be noted- are much more than twice as numerous
as earners of wages and salaries. *
• Henc::e. no doubt. the tear. over any sUltained effort to keep conunodlty prices under control I

97

CHAPTER III:

UVELlHOOD PATTERN-I951

14. We may now follow up our 324 lakhs of self-supporting persons
engaged in industries and services other than cultivation and ascertain what
exactly they do in order to earn their income. All industries and services other
than cultivation have been grouped together into 10 divisions, and 88 subdivisions. Any grouping system is bound to appear somewhat arbitrary- but
the system we are following has been carefully drawn up so as to satisfy two
requirements as far as practicable. One is, that our statistics should be comparable with those collected in other C01Ultries under a scheme approved by the
United Nations Economic and Social emmci!. The other requirement is, that
the 1951 Census statistics should be comparable with the published statistics
of the 1931 and earlier censuses in India. The results of classification of
the 324 lakhs of persons referred to above are shown in the table below
TABLE 8

Number
(IN LAKHS) Percentage

Division of Industries and Services

Division 0
Primary industries other than cultivation, mining and
24. 0
quarrying.
Division I
Mining and quarrying
S'7
Division a
Processing and manufacture- foodstuffs, textiles, leather
and products thereof •
55'1
Division 3
Processing and manufacture- metals, chemicals and
products thereof
12"4
Division 4
Proceessing and manufacture not elsewhere specified
24"3
Division 5
Construction and utilities
15·9
Division 6
59. 0
Conunerce •
Division 7
19.0
Transport. storage and communications
"
Division 8
Health, education and public administration
32·9
Division 9
Services not elsewhere specified
75·4

23"3

32 3'7

100·0

TOTAL

7'4

l·S
17. 0

3'8

7·5

4·9
18·2

5·9
{O·2

INDIA PICTURE

We may now look into each of these divisions briefly, to see what sort of activities
are included in each and their relative numerical importance.
15. PRIMARY PRODUCTION- Divisions 0 and 1- The people who work
on the land and produce food and all the raw materials of industries are 'primary
producers'. By far the most important among them are those who work on
cultivated land and produce field crops. We have seen already that their total
number is 694 lakhs. The other primary producers number only 30 lakhsthough two separate divisions have been allotted for their classification.
Plantation industries- This is the most important sub-division in Division o.
It accounts for 10'6 lakhs of people (or 44'2 per cent oftrus division) and
includes all the workers in tea, coffee and rubber plantations (and in fact, all
other kinds of plantations except the cultivation of such crops as sugarcane or
betel, undertaken in conjunction with ordinary cultivation of field crops).
Stock-raising- This sub-division accounts for 6'3 lakhs of people (or
26' 3 per cent of this division). It includes all herdsmen and shepherds and
those who breed or maintain herds of cattle, buffaloes and other large animals
as their principal means of livelihood. [The ordinary cultivator who makes a
little extra income by cattle-breeding is not, however, included here but shown
ooder Li velihood Class I or II.]
Fishing- This sub-division accounts for 4' 2 lakhs of people (or IT 5 per
cent of Division 0).

Forestry, woodcutting and collection of forest produce not elsewhere specifiedThis accounts for 2' 5 lakhs of people (or 10' 5 per cent of (his division).
A separate sub-division was provided for 'rearing of small animals and
insects'. This was intended to include poultry farmers, bee-keepers, ~ilkworm
rearers, cultivators of lac and so on. But the number returned was extremely
small (only 27 thousand for the whole coootry). The rea.c;;on, no dOUbt, was
that such activities provide only a 'secondary' means of livelihood. Another
sub-division- provided for 'hunting'- also yielded an even smaller number
(under 9 thousand).
MINING AND QUARRYlNG- It is extraordinary how small a number of
people are engaged on 'mining and quarrying' over an entire sub-con~ent.
There is little doubt that the figures are substantially correct. They reflect
the relative scarcity of known deposits of profitably workable minerals over a
very large part of the COWltry, as well as the insufficiency of organised enter·
prises in the few localities where there is no. such scarcity.
Coal mining is by far the most imponant sub-division within this division.
It accounts for 3' I lakhs of peopJe or 54' 9 per cent of all persoas mgaged in
99

CiiAh-ER Iii: LiVELiHooD PATTERN-"f9St
mining and quarrying. An estimate of the relative money value of raw minerai
output (which will be found among the papers in APPENDIX I) repre3ellts the
money value of coal as being 58.9 per cent of the money value of all mineral
productio n in India.
Extraction from the earth of stone, clay, sand and other materials used
in building or manufacture of cement, engaged I ' 2lakhs of people (or 21·5 per
cent of this division).
Other kinds of mining and quarrying provide gainful employment as shown
in the table below :
TABLE 9
Number
(IN

Gf'oup

THOUSANDS)

Iron ore
Metals other than iron ore
Petroleum
Mica
Salt, saltpetre and saline substances
•
Non-metallic minerals not otherwise Bpecified

9
57
3
33

This concludes our account
of 30 lakhs of workers, engaged
in primary production, other than
cultivation of land.
16. PROCESSING AND MANUFACTURE- The workers in Divisions
2, 3 and 4- all engag~ in

'processing and manufacture'number 92 lakhs. Three out of
every five persons among them
22
are engaged in processing the
11
primary products of cultivation
and animal husbandry. All of
TOTAL
135
them are included in Division 2
which accounts for 55 laths and is
divided into various sub -divisions as explained below:

Grains and pulses- Milling of cereals and pulses, hand-pounding of rice,
manual dehusking and flour grinding, grain parching and similar processing of
grains and pulses employ 4·0 lakhs of persons- of whom about half are women
and a little under three quarters are living in villages.
Vegetable oil and dairy products- There were 2·7 lakhs of people mostly
males and mainly self-employed.
in villiges.

About one lakh live in towns and the rest

Sugar industries- They provide a living for 1·4 lakhs of people, mostly
males. About one-third among them are self-employed and two-thirds are
employees. About two-thirds live in villages and one-third in towns.
BefJerages- The sub-division includes brewers and distillers, toddy drawers
and people who make aerated and mineral waters and ice. They number I· 6
100

iNDIA PICTURE

lakhs- mostly males and mainly self-employed, and a very large proportion
live in villages. The number. coWlted in towns was only 33 thousands.
Tobacco- The sub-division includes- not the growers of tobacco (who
are counted among cultivators), but- those who prepare raw leaf tobacco for
manufacturing, as also makers of bidis, cigarettes, cigars, cheroots and snuff.
They number 3' 6 lakhs- about five~sixths males, and nearly two lakhs live in
towns. I ' 5 lakhs only are employees- the others are self-employed.

Other food industries account for I . 8 lakhs- mostly males and mainly selfemployed. Roughly a lakh live in towns.
All food industries- Altogether, therefore, we have apart from the cultivators who work in the fields and the housewives who mostly cook and serve
the food, (and not counting the people working in hotels and eating-houses as
well as cooks employed as domestic servants)- a total of 15 lakhs of people
who earn their living by processing the food, drink and tobacco consumed by
other people.
Cotton textiles- This important sub-division includes cotton ginning,
cleaning and pressing; spinning, sizing and weaving; dyeing, bleaching and
printing. 20' 6 lakhs* of people earn a living from this industry, which means
one out of every 16 persons engaged in all industries and services other than
cultivation. Women workers are relatively small in number (2' 3 lakhs). Nearly
12 lakhs live in towns and 9 lakhs in villages. The self-employed workers
nwnber nearly 13 lakhs and are more numerous than employees. Most of the
former must be handloom weavers and most of the latter must be factory workers.
Wearing apparel (except footwear) and made-up textile goods- All tailors
and dressmakers, makers of hosiery and embroiderers are included in this subdivision which accounts for 6' 5 lakhs- mostly males, mostly self-employed and
rather more numerous in towns than in villages ..

01her textiles- There is another sub-division which includes all textile
industries other than the two mentioned above. This includes pressing, bailing,
spinning and weaving of jute as well as spinning and weaving of wool, silk,
hemp and flax. It includes rayon manufacture; it also includes manufacture
of rope, twine, string and similar goods made from cocoanut aloes, straw,
linseed and hair.
• These numben might excite surprise and be re,larded as tOO small. It should be remembered
that we are analysing the numben of lelf-supporting penona only; unpaid family belpen and pan·time
workert whOse principal income is duived from some other SOUrce are not included in thi. number. Pot
, f~ .talc~nt on thit pOint, refer~nce Pl81 be mJ~c to the DOte printed 8. Part D of APPmmIX III.

10:1

CHAPTER In:

LIVELIHOOD PATTERN-'I951

The total number under all these heads is only 7' I lakhs of which 1'6
lakhs are females. The total number is almost equally divided between villages
and to'WllS- women workers in villages being twice as numerous as in towns.
Employees predominate (numbering 4' 6 lakhs).

Leather, leather products, and /ooUDear account for 5' 8 lakhs, mostly males
and mostly self-emploYed. They live mainly in villages (the number living
n towns being only I ' 9 lakhs).

Metals and chemicals- We have now finished the industries which use the
product9 of cultivation and animal husbandry as their raw material. The second
of the three divisions of industries which process and manufacture goods, consists of all those which are based on metals and chemicals. Division 3 had been
provided for numbering them; but the total number in these industries is only
12' 4 lakhs. Female workers are about half-a-lakh only. There are T 8 lakhs
in towns and 4' 6 lakhs in villages. Employees predominate, numbering 6' 9
lakhs. A series of sub-divisions which are very important in other countries
had been provided but very few numbers tUrned up; the sub-divisions with
over a lakh were- manufacture of transport equipment (2' 2 lakhs), machinery
(other than electrical machinery) including engineering workshops (1' 2 lakhs),
basic manufacture of iron and steel (1' 1 lakh) and the re..<:;iduary sub-division,
manufacture of metal products otherwise tlllclassified *(6 2Iakhs).

Other manufacturing industries- This is Division 4, which accotlllts for
24' 3 lakhs. The most important sub-division is the manufacture of wood and
Carpenters, turners, joiners and basketwood products (10' 4 lakhs).
makers account for practically the whole of this number. Another important
sub-division proved to be the manufacture of non-metallic mineral products
(4' 5 lakhs). This means mainly potters and includes makers of all earthen..
ware porcelain, crockery, glass, glass bangles and glass beads etc. Out of the
total of 24' 3 lakhs of workers in this division as many as 17' 3 lakhs were selfemployed persons and 15' 1 lakhs lived in villages. Female workers numbered
less than one in ten.
.
This concludes our accotlllt of the 92 lakhs of self-supporting persons who
make their living out of processing and manufacture.

17. CoMMERCE- We may next consider 'Commerce'-Division 6- which
provides a living for 59 lakhs of workers, including 5' 6 laths of female workers.
Less than a :fifth among them are employees (I I • 3 lakhs). Others are selfw
• This includes 3· 61akbs of btackRl1\i thl and other workcn in iroD, and makers of implement••

102

INDIA PICTURE

•

cmpioyed. They are more numerow in towns (34' 8 1akhs) than in villages
(24.2 lakhs). They fall into three distinct groups as shown in TABLE 10.
Among the 5I lakhs engaged
TABLE 10
in retail trade, a little less
than one-half· (22· 5 lakhs) are
Number
engaged in selling foodstuffs
(IN LAlOiS)
including drink and tobacco; I ' 9
- - - - - - - - - - - - - lakhs sell fuel and 5'6 lakhs sell
textiles and leather good~. The
Retail trade
Wholesale trade
goods sold by 21 lakhs are
Money-lending, banking,
unclassified. A great many among
insurance and real estate
3'3
them are likely to be selling such
59' 0
a jumble of varied commodities
TOTAL
that they are not probably classi.
fiable.
We have already observed that much the greater number of those engaged
in processing and manufacturing industries were processing the products of
cultivation and animal husbandry, It is now seen that the same is true of
retail trade.
18, CoNSTRUCTION AND UTILITIES- Division 5- This accounts for 15'9
lakhs including 2' 7 lakhs of female workers in villages and towns. [Whereas
the numbers are about equal in villages and towns, it should be borne in mind
that the proportion of rural workers to the rural population will be very much
smaller than the proportion of urban workers to the urban population, as the
rural population is about five times as numerous as the urban population.]
The self-employed persons number 8' 4 Jakhs while employees are 7' I lakhs.
This division includes all workers engaged in the maintenw1(..'C as well as new
construction of buildings, roads, bridges, rail-roads, telegraph and telephone
lines, irrigation and other agriCUltural works. It also includes people employed
on works and services which provide electric power and gas supply, domestic
and industrial water supply and sanitary works and services, A difficult (and
rather doubtful) decision on classification has brought scavengers WIder the
last mentioned sub-division of this division.
19. TRANSPORT, STORAGE AND COMMUNICATIONS- Division 7- The total

number in this division is 19'0 lakhs. Female workers are negligible in numberonly 63 thousand. The nwnber living ill villages (5·9 lakhs) is less than a
third of the total. Employees predominate.

CHAPTER III:

UVELIHOOD PATTERN-.I95t

Among the sub-divisions, 'transport by road' comes first with 8' 9 lakhs,
then 'Railway transport' with 5' 7 lakhs and 'transport by water' with "2· 2 JaIths.
A very small number (13 thousand only) appears under transport by air. [It
should be mentioned here that the number under 'railway transport' would
not be exactly the same as the nwnber employed by all the Railwa},s of India,
for workshop personnel and those who make and maintain the permanent ways
and bridges will appear Wlder separate divisions provided for manufacture,
construction etc.
The same applies to persons engaged in the Post and
Telegraph Services.] Though a whole sub-division has been provided in
order to secure international comparability of data relating to 'storage and
warehousing' the number recorded under it is insignificant-less than
ten thousand.
20. REALm, EDUCATION AND PUBLiC ADMINISTRATION- Division 8-

This
division accounts for 32'9 lakhs of people- or one in ten among all non-agriculturists. Female workers number 2 '7lakhs ; self-employed workers number
2' 4 lakhs. As may be expected, most persons in this division are employees.
20'7 lakhs live in towns, while 12' 2 lakhs live in villages.
Medical and other health services claim 3' 8 lakhs made up of 2' 3 lakhs
living in towns and I ' 5 lakhs living in villages. Not all of them, of course, are
doctors- for all engaged in these services are counted. A special count by
groups within this sub-division (which is somewhat incomplete·) shows the
following results:
TABLE

II

Group

Registered medical practitioners •
•
Vaids, hakims and other persons practjsing medicine without bejng
registered
Compounders
Nurses
Midwives .
Vaccinators
Dln~ists

Number

$)6,147
38,407
31,S 1 7
23,93 8
5,928
3,283

All other persons employed in hospitals or other private establishments rendering medical Or other health services, but not including scavengers or other sanitary staff
·The figures exclUde the numbers ill tqe fonow~ dis~rict8 Of BihllJ , M~hyr, Bh8,al.pur~ Slban..
Purnea and Santhal Parganas,

104

INDIA PICTURE

'Educational services and research' employ 7' 4 lakhs of people, almos t
equally divided between towns and villages, Roughly one in six (1 '2 lakhs)
are female workers. A special count (which is somewhat incomplete·) showed
99,256 professors, lecturers, teachers and research workers employed in
universities, colleges and research institutions; while all other professors,
lecturers and teachers numbered 549,544.
Those classified as being engaged in 'public administration' numqcr 21'6
lakhs. If we exclude about 9 thousand persons recorded as being employed by
Non-Indian Governments, we have the following account for 21' 5 lakhs
of people:
TABLE

12
Number

Group

(IN THOUSANDS)

Employees of the Central Government

503

Employees of State Governments :

J ,426

General administration .

809

Police (other than viUagc watchmen)

380

Village establishments including village watchmen

237

Employees of District Boards, Municipalities Hnd other local bodies
TOTAL

224
2,153

It should be explained that 'public administration' is a residuary classification
in the sense that it excludes employees of Governments, municipalities and
local bodies who are classifiable under any other specific service sub-division.
Thus doctors, compounders, nurses and midwives arc classified under one subdivision 'medical and other health services', whether or not they are government
employees. Likewise, in 'educational services and research'. Station masters
and engine-drivers come under the sub-division C railway transport', and not
'public administration'. Similarly for the postal and telegraph services. The
public works staff go under 'construction'; and the workers in Sindri or in
other Government-owned industrial enterprises come under the appropriate sub-division for processing and manufacture. Who remain?
·See footnote on page 104.

•

CHAPTER III:

UVELIHOOD PATTERN-:X951

Among the sub-divisions, 'transport by road' comes first with 8' 9 lakhs,
then 'Railway transport' with 5' 7 lakhs and 'transport by water' with" 2. • 2. JaIilis.
A very small number (13 thousand only) appears lUlder transport by air. [It
should be mentioned here that the number lUlder 'railway transport' would
not be exactly the same as the number employed by all the Railwa}s of India,
for workshop personnel and those who make and maintain the permanent ways
and bridges will appear under separate divisions provided for manufacture,
construction etc.
The same applies to persons engaged in the Post and
Telegraph Services.] Though a whole sub-division has been provided in
order tu secure international comparability of data relating to 'storage and
warehousing' the number recorded Wlder it is insignificant-less than
ten thousand.
20. HEALTH, EDUCATION AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATlON- Division 8-

This
division accounts for 32'9 lakhs of people- or one in ten among all non-agriculturists. Female workers number 2 . 7 lakhs ; self-employed workers nwnber
2' 4 lakhs. As may be expected, most persons in this division are employees.
20' 7 lakhs live in towns, while 12' 2 lakhs live in villages.
Medical and other health services claim 3' 8 lakhs made up of 2. . 3 lakhs
living in towns and I . 5 lakhs living in villages. Not all of them, of course, are
doctors- for all engaged in these services are counted. A special count by
groups within this sub-division (which is somewhat incomplete·) shows the
following results:
TABLE

II

Group
Registered medical practitioners •
•
Vaids, hakims and other persons practising medicine without being
registered
Compounders
Nurses
•
Midwives .
Vaccinators
Dm~ists

Number

96,147
38~o7

31,5 1 7
23,93 8
5,928
3,2.83

All other persons employed in hospitals Or other private establishments rendering medical or other health services, but not including scavengers or other sanitary staff
-·.The6gures exclUde the numbers in t~e followin~ di8~riq. ofBm.r , Monshyr, Bba,alrur, SIJianI.
Purnea and Santhal Parganas,

INDIA PICTURE

'Educational services and research' employ 7·4 lakhs of people, almos [
equally divided between towns and villages. Roughly one in six (1·2 lakhs)
are female workers. A special count (which is somewhat incomplete·) showed
99,256 professors, lecturers, teachers and research workers employed in
universities, colleges and research institutions; while all other professors,
lecturers and teachers numbered 549,544.
Those classified as being engaged in 'public administration' numqer 21·6
lakhs. If we exclude about 9 thousand persons recorded as being employed by
Non-Indian Governments, we have the following account for 21·5 lakhs
of people:
TABLE

12

Number

Group

(IN THOUSANDS)

Employces of the Ccntral Government

503

Employees of State' Governments:

1,426

General administration .

809

Police (other than village watchmen)

380

Village establishments including village watchmen

237

Employees of District Boards, Municipalities and other local bodies
TOTAL

224
2,153

It should be explained that 'public administration' is a residuary classification
in the sense that it excludes employees of Governments, municipalities and
local bodies who are classifiable under any other specific service sub-division.
Thus doctors, compounders, nurses and midwives are classified under one subdivision 'medical and other health services', whether or not they are government
employees. Likewise, in 'educational services and research'. Station masters
and engine-drivers come under the sub-division 'railway transport', and not
'public administration'. Similarly for the postal and telegraph services. The
public works staff go under 'construction'; and the workers in Sindri or in
other Governrnent-owned industrial enterprises come under the appro·
priate sub-division for processing and manufacture. Who remain?
·Sel' footnote on page 104.

Cl1APtER ONE -

tHE LAND ANb THE PEOptE-I9~t

These are the people employed by Governments, municipalities and local
bodies who are engaged in : (i) the administration oflaw and justice; (it) the
defence of the country; (iii) the maintenance of watch and ward and the security of person and property of the people; (iv) the assessment and collection
of public revenue, management of public funds and public property; (v) the
general management, control, and co-ordination of the activities of varied
groups of establishments maintained by the Governments for rendering specific
services to the people (health, education, transport, communication, etc,); and
('Vi) the rendering of personal staff assistance to those who actually govern the
country and make its laws.
21. SERVICES

NOT EISEWHERE SPECIFIED -

Division 9- The number of

persons recorded under this residuary division, is 75' 4 lakhs including 14' 5
lakhs of female workers, 34'5 lakhs are employees. Forty-one lakhs live in
villages. As many as 37' 3 lakhs among them are people about whom
nothing more is known than that they are self-supporting and earn their living
by rendering some service or other. Fifteen lakhs among them are also known
to have described themselves as 'employees' and the others as 'self-employed
persons'. In some of these cases, it may be that the nature of their activity is
clearly specifiable but has been left unspecified either inadvertently or unavoidably, [Special efforts were made to reduce the number of such cases.] In a
large proportion of such cases, however, it might well be that they are people
who are not conveniently classifiable and are multi-purpose workers in a very
genuine sense. There are 8'0 lakhs of these people who have described themselves as employees and who live in villages. It is not impossible that some of
them are employed as cultivating labourers and failed to be recorded under
Livelihood Class III (which includes 149lakhs of people). More probably, their
participation in agricultural labour is not sufficiently regular or important and
so they were rightly excluded from Livelihood Class III. It is, in any case,
worth bearing in mind that there are 8'0 lakhs of employees and 14' 5 lakhs
of self-employed persons living in villages about whom we know only that
they earn their living by work, but we do not know what work they do.
Turning to the 38' I lakhs of people for whom details are available, they
are shown in TABLE 13 on opposite page, by sub-divisions in the order of
numerical importance.

too

INDIA PIC'tUtm
TABLE

13

Number

Group

(IN THOUSANDS)

Domestic services .
Laundries and laundry services
Barbers and beauty shops
Religious, charitable and welfare services ,
Legal and business services
Recreation services
Hotels, restaurants and eating-houses
Arts, letters and journalism
TOTAL

22. Affiliation

of dependants

to

3,810

self-supporting persons by means of

li'lJelihood- We noted at the beginning of this chapter that within the total of

3,566 lakhs of people who were to be classified according to their means of livelihood, there were 2,143 lakhs of people classed as 'non-earning dependants' and
another 379 lakhs of people classed as 'earning dependants'. We have seen
in detail, the nature of the activities by which the remaining number- 'Vi•• ,
1,044 lakhs of self-supporting persons- earned their living and maintained
themselves as well as others who depended on them for maintenance. It is
important that we should know not only how many self-supponing persons
there are who earn a living from agriculture or from different branches of industries and services, but how mWly people in all are supported- including in
this reckoning not only the self-supporting persons but also their dependants.
Such affiliation of dependants to self-supporting persons by means of livelihood
could not be carried out in great detaiJ, owing to the time and cost involved,
but has been done under eight different heads- called 'Livelihood Classes' as
shown in TABLE 14 on next page.

107

CHAPTER III:

LIVELIHOOD PATTERN-I951

TABLE

Selfsupporting
persons
Livelihood Class

14

Dependants
.A-

non-earning

+

Percentage
to general
earning Total population
(including

dependants)

(N U M BE R I N L A K H s)

I,673

46 '9

3 16

8,8

448

12'6

33

+ 21 5
+ 39
+ 52
+ 4

53

--

710

1,47 0

+ 310

2,49 0

69'8

V.

122

223

VI .

59

145

VII •

17

37

VIII •

13 6

TOTAL-NON-AGRICULTVRAL
CLASSES

GIlNEHAL POI'ULATfON

I .

457

I,ooI

.

SS

189

III .

149

247

IV .

16

II

TOTAL-AGRICULTURAL
CLASSES

I'S

32

377

la'S

9

2 13

6'0

2

56

1·6

268

+
+
+
+

26

43 0

334

673

+

69

1,07 6

3°'2

1,044

2,1.13

-I-

379

3,566

100'0

12' I

--

Earlier in thisrchapter, we have already seen who Livelihood Classes I
to IV are. Briefly, they are: the 'ov.'Iler-cultivators', 'tenant-cultivators', 'cultivating labourers' and 'agricultural rentiers' respectively. The figures in the
table show the)elf-supporting persons of t.hese classes, along with the dependent
members of their households.
Livelihood Class V stands for all persons engaged in non-agricultural ,
'production' (that is, Divisions 0, I, 2, 3 and 4) together with their dependants.
Livelihood Class VI stands for people engaged in 'commerce' (Division 6) and
their dependants. Livelihood Class VII stands for 'transport' (a part of
_Division 7) and their dependants. Livelihood Class VIII stands for all others
108

INDIA PICTURE

including non-agricultural
income recipients.

rentiers,

pensioners

and other

miscellaneous

23. It will be observed that the percentages of agriculturists and nonagriculturists were found to 'be 68' I and 31.9 when we were considering selfsupporting persons only (see paras 5 to 7); but they turned out to be 69·8 and
30' 2, when we considered dependants and self-supporting persons together.
The figures show that agriculture supports a slightly larger proportion of people
than it provides self-supporting employment fOf. Why this dHference? It
is to be expected, because the number of dependants supported by a given
number of self-supporting persons is not exactly the same in all livelihood
classes. The relevant numbers are computed and shown below :
TABLE

15
Number oj Jepel/dants supported
by 100 self-supporting pcrsom
~

Livelihood Class

Non-earning Earning
depcndu1Zls depcll dams

Total

I

2T9

47

266

II

21 5

44

259

III

166

35

201

IV

206

25

23 1

2.07

44

:ZSl

V

18 5

26

21 I

VI

246

15

261

VII

218

12

23°

VIII

197

19

216

201

21

222

205

37

24 2

TOTAL-AGRICUL TURAL CUSSES

TOTAI.-NON-AGRICULTURAL CLASSES
GENERAL POPULATION

24. There are interesting variations both in the total number of dependants,
as well as in the break up of this number between non-earning dependants and
earning dependants. The low figures for. cUltivating labourers (Livelihood
Class III) and the high figures for 'commerce' (Livelihood Class VI) stand out.
They suggest the presence of significant variatir>us among diff<;r~t soci.aJ groups.
10 9

CHAPTER III:

LIV'ELIHOOD PATTERN-I9S1

It is probable that cultivating labourers have, in fact, the higher percentage of
family members engaged in earning and living. It is possible that there are
groups with even higher ratios of dependants to self-supporting persons than
in 'oommerce'. We might find them, if we could isolate specific professional
service groups merged within Livelihood Class VIII.· The broad position
is clear. The average self-supporting person uses his income to support himself

and at least l'lDO others. Roughly Dn8 among three self-supporting persons also
provides, in addition, partial support for one earning dependant.

B - Zonal Variations
FIGURES similar to those set out in the last

section for India have been
compiled for every zone, every state, every natural division and every district
in each state, and for different rural tracts and urban tracts separately within
each district. The totals for each of the eight livelihood classes are, indeed,
furnished for every single village, and every town, and every ward (or mohallah)
of every town separately. A review of these figures and comments on their
significance will be found for each state in each state census report.

A review for India has also been prepared and printed separately (APPENDIX
III). The principal object of this review is to furnish a full account of the
definitions and classifications adopted at this census, to compare them with
those adopted at previous censuses and to bring out the differences and
similarities clearly so that users of census data may be able to study them in
relation to the data provided by prior censuses or by other ,sources. The
review also sets out the results of a preliminary study of similarities ana
differences between different zones of India and also between India in 1951 and
India in 1931. The main results of comparison between different zones are
briefly set out in this section. The results of comparison between 1951 and
193 I will be referred to in the next chapter.

26. We have seen that there is a three-fold division among the peopleself-supporting persons (29'3 per cent), earning dependants (10 '6) per cent
• Considerations Of time and cost have stood in the way oftbe detailed sortillg and crosl-tabulation
neces.. ry for luch studies- but they ~IIJl I;>e up~~rt,kcp ,t l~i,ufe, if coD,idn~d peCC811llfY~ from the
National Register ()f CftizellJ.

110

ZONAL VARIATIONS

..

and non-earning dependants (60'1 per cent). The percentages relate to the
country as a whole. How they differ among the zones is shown below:
TABLE 16
PercenCQ8e co general population
"-"'\

Zone

Selfsupporting Earning Nim-carni,lg
persolls dependants dcpcllda1UJ

North India

30'5

12'0

57'5

East India ,

30 '8

6'0

63'2

South India

26'S

4'9

68·6

West India,

26'9

15'8

57'3

Central India

29'1

20'0

5°'9

North-West India

32 '3

J2'6

55'1

29'3

Jo·6

60' I

INDIA

-

If we run our eyes down the coJumn showing the percmtages of selfsupporting persons we might be inclined to say that North . West India stand., first
from the point of view of provision of gainful employment and South India
comes last; and the order among the other zones is: East India, North I,Ildia,
Central India and West India, The differences are not very large- three
per cent on either side of the all-India average covers all the zones,
If, for the same purpose, we follow the ascending order of percentages of
the 'non-eaming dependants' we get South India last" again; but the first place
is taken by Central India instead of North-West India, The order among
intermediate zones also alters and we have North-West India, West India, North
India and, after a long interval, East India, The quantitative differences
between the zones are larger- we need about 9 per cent on either side of the
all-India average to cover all the zones,
The difference in results between the two approaches is caused by wide
variations in the percentage of earning dependants, Here again, we find South
India to be the last in order, Centra) India comes first. One is nearly one-half
and the other is nearly double the aU-India average.
III

CHAPTER III:

LIVELIHOOD PATTERN-I95 I

These differences between one zone and another cannot be attributed to
corresponding differences in age structure. For the latter differences are far
too smal1. Judged by age structure alone, South India should head the list
instead of being at the bottom.

27. When we analyse the figures separately for men and women and for
villages and towns, we find that the largest amount of variations occur in the
classification of village women. This is seen from the table below :
TABLE I7

Zone

Ratio between
PcrcCIltage self-supporting persons
of rural alld caming dependants
females
a 111 0 n g 100 r z. r a I
who are fL'lJlali?J who arc either
ciillCr
self·supporting persons
sdfor
earntilg dependants
,.---_ _ J.._ _ _-.
supporting
persons or
Selfearning
supporting Earning
dependa/lts
persom dcpcndams

North India

26·7

24

76

East India

20·S

68

32

South India

16·2

64

36

West India.

36 ·S

18

82

Central India

4°·9

23

77

North-West India

33. 6

41

S9

26·S

39

61

INDIA

The six zones, it may be observed, fall into three pairs- each presenting
a pattern of its own.
East India and South India have the smallest ratios of village women who
go out for field work or otherwise take some part in earning a livelihood for the
family- the number is one in six in one case, and one in five in the other.
It so happens that it is precisely in these two zones that the work of the women
is rated high.
Among the few who do work, the number classified as selfsupporting is twice as numerous as the ·number classified as earning dependants.
II2

ZONAL VARIATIONS

Central India and West India are the two zones where the exact opposite
is observed.
We have the highest ratios (roughly four out of ten in one case
and four out of eleven in another) of women who go out for field work or otherwise take some part in earning a livelihood for the family. But at the same time
they are a]80 the two zones where the contribution of women labour is rated
lowest. Among these women, earning dependants are twice as numerous as
self-supporting women in one zone and four times as numerous in the other.
The other two zones - North India and North -West India- fall in an
intermediate category between these two extremes.
..
What arc we to think of these variations brought to light by the census ?
It is probable that it is in fact a correct picture of how livelihood is earned and
people are supported in diffcrrent parts of the country. There arc, apparently,
substantial differences in the volume and nature of participation of village women
in livelihood earning. The differences do probably reflect corresponding differences in conditions under which cultivation is carried on as well as differences
in social habits and customs. At [he same time, it would not be safe to go
further than that and maintain that the differences in the figures between
different zones have been accurately measured by the figures obtained. It would
be unsafe to dogmatise on this point because- simple as it may sound- there are
real difficulties in securing that the line between self-supporting persons and
earning dependmlts is drawn at an identical level in all parts of a large subcontinent.
To what extent do the different zones differ from one another in the
extent to which gainful employment is actually available? If we arc to answer
this question satisfactorily we should do two things :
28.

FirSl,- We must leave the women out of the reckoning. Village women
present a special problem of evaluation of their work, while women
in towns play such a small part that they can be conveniently omitted
along with village women.

Secondly,- We should have a rough and ready method by which caming
dependants may be reckoned as a definite fraction of self-supporting
persons and then combined in a single category of 'bread-winners'.
Based on these ideas, we arrive at 'male bread-willller percentages' for the
villages and towns of each zone separately (as the percentage of self-supporting

113

CHAPTER III:

LIVELIHOOD PATTEItN-I951

persons plus one-third of the percentage of earning dependants),

The results

are shown in the table below :
TABLE 18

Male bread-winner
percentages

Zone

Villages

Towns

North India

5S

S3

East India
South India
West India
Central India

48
44

S6

North-West India
INDIA

53
54

46
52
SI
SI

50

S2

47

The figures lead to the
following conclusions as regards
actual a v a i I a b i Ii t y of gainful
employment for males:

First,- MALE EMPLOYMENT IN
VILLAGES: North
India
stands first, followed
closely by North-West
India and Central India,
East India and West
India come next with a
definitely lower bread.
winner percentage, South
India stands last.

Secondly,- MALE EMPLOYMENT IN TOWNS: East India stands first and
South India stands last. The other zones havt" intennediate values
for bread-wim:er percentages. They are, however, fairly close to
one another. Theorder is : North India, West India, North-West
India and Central India.

Thirdly,- DIFFERENCE BETWEEN VILLAGES AND TOWNS: Towns provide
more male employment than villages in the country as a whole and in
East India, West India and South India.
Villages provide more male employment than towns in North-West India,
North India and Central India.

29. We have seen that the agricuJtural cIasses- that is to say, all the
people who are supported by agriculture, including dependants- number 69' 8
per cent of the population. This percentage also varies from one zone to
another. East India stands first (75'6 per cent) and West India last (59'7 per
cent). The percentages in other zones, in order, are : North India (74' 2),
Central India (73'2), North-West India (66'0) and South India (64'3),

30. The numerical insignificance of agricultural rentiers and their dependants (Livelihood Class IV) is clearly brought out in all zones. In the country
as a whole, they are I' 5 per cent of the general population and 2· I per cent of
the agricultural classes.

According to the latter mode of measurement, agricul-

tural Tenliers aTe fewest (1·1 per cent) in Bast India- tJu origituJI home of tIN

II4

ZONAL VARIATIONS

permanently settled zamindari system. They aTe 3' 3 per cent in South India
and West lndia- the original hume of the raiyal'UXlri system. The other zones,
in order, are: North India (1"4), Central India (2'3) and North-West
India (2·7),

31. Cultivating labourer~ and their dependants (Livelihood Class III) are
12' 6 per cent of the general population and 18' 0 per cent of the agricultural
classes. On the latter basis, they are fewest in North India (7"7) and most
numerous in South India (26'6). The other zones, in order, are: NorthWest India (8'1), West India (14'1), East India (20'3) and Central
India (24 '0).

32. Tenant-cultivators and their dependants (Livelihood Class II) are
8' 9 per cent of the general population and 12' 7 per cent of the agricultural
classes. On the latter basis, they are fewest in North India (6'9) and most
numerous in West India (16 '0). The other zones, in order, are: Central India
(9 . 0), East India (12' 4) and South India (13 . 5). It is not possible to fix the
position of North-West India satisfactorily because when the census was taken
the proportion was temporarily swollen to the abnormal figure of 26' 3 per cent
- because of the mass migration which had taken place shortly before. A
very large number of displaced persons who have since become (or will shortly
become) owner-cultivators are shown a" tenant-cultivators because they
had not yet been given permanent and heritable rights of occupancy In
land.

33. Owner-cultivators and their dependants (Livelihood Class I) are
46' 9 per cent of the general population and 67·2 pcr ct..'I1t of the agricultural
classes. Their preponderance among the agrkultural cJasses is clear in all
the zones.
The highest percentage occurs in North India (83' 9) and the
lowest in South India (56 '6). The other zones, in order, are quite close
to one another- West India (66 '6), East India (66 ·2) and Central India (64 ·7).
North-West India with 63'0 per cent will probably go above all these
three, if the temporary and abnormal feature mentioned above is allowed
fOf.

34. In the country as a whole, the relative proportion of cultivators
(UveJihood Classei I and II) and cultiv2ting labourers (Livelihood Class III) is
of the order of 82 cultivators to 18 cultiwting labourers.
'This proportion is an important indicator of the structure of agricultural

organisation and economic relations.

lIS

LIVELIHOOD PATTERN- I 95 1

CHAPTER III:

HIGH RATIO OF CULTIVATORS TO CULTIVATING LABOURERS

It is found that cultivators are SO or more and cultivating labourers 10
or less in the following divisions of the country :

North Ir~dia

All the divisions of the zone except the
Uttar Pradesh Hills and Plateau
All the six Himalayan divisions, and
Chhota Nagpur

·

East India
South India

W'est India
Central India
North- West India

• Mysore only
Rombay-Konkan and Saurashtra
· Madhya Bharat Plateau only
· The two Himal9yan divisions, all divisions
of Rajasthan except the Rajasthan Pl:1teau,
and Ajmer.

LOW RATIO OF CULTIVATORS TO CULTIVATING LABOURERS

Cultivators are 75 or less and cultivating labourers 25 or more in the
following divisions of the country :

North India
East India
South India
West India

·

Central India

·
·

North-West India

.

None
North Bihar and South Bihar
North Madras, South Madras, West Madras
and 'Travancore-Cochin
None (Greater Bombay being ignored)
North Hyderabad, South-West Madhya
Pradesh, North-West Madhya Pradesh
and Bhopal. [South Hydcrabad is also
close to the·margin. ]
None.

Cultivators are unusually small in number, and cultivating labourers
are unusually numerous in the following divisions: Travancore-Cochin
(62 : 38); West Madras (60 : 40); and South-West Madhya Pradesh (53 : 47).
35. In the country as a whole, there are 84 owner-cultivators (with
dependants) for every 16 tenant-cultivators (with dependants). Adopting tn¢

u6

ZONAL VARIATIONS

same standards as in the. last case, those divisions of the country where the
proportion is high and those where the proportion is low are identified below:
HIGH PROPORTION- Owner-cultivators number 90 or more and tenantcultivators 10 or Jess in the following divisions :
North India
. All the divisions except Uttar Pradesh
Hills and Plateau
. Chhota Nagpur, Orissa Inland and Assam
East India
Hills
. Mysorc and Madras Deccan
South India
Bombay Deccan Northern
West India
East Madhya Pradesh, North Hyderabad,
Central India
Madhya Bharat Hills and Vindhya
Pradesh
• The two Himalayan divisions, Rajasthan
North-West India
Hills, Rajasthan Plateau and Ajmcr.
LOW IlROPORTION- Owner-cultivators number 75 or less and tenantcultivators 25 or more in the following div;slons :
North India
• None
East .India
Both divisions of \Vest Bengal
South India
. West Madras
. Bombay-Konkan, Greater Bombay and
West India
Kutch
Iv\adhya Dharat Plateau
Central India
• East Rajasthan Plains and Rajasthan Dry
North-West India
Area. [Punjab Plain being an abnormal
and temporary addition to this group.]

36. In order to avoid misunderstanding it should be mentioned here
that tcultivating labourers' of Livelihood Class III arc not necessarily all
'hmdless agriculturists'. Some of them do have land but so little that the
wages they obtain from working for others is more important to them than
the income from their own land. The same applies to Livelihood Class II alsosome of them have plots of land of their own, but they arc classified as tenantcultivators if the income from rented land exceeds the income from owned
land.
Contrariwise, the term 'agricultural landholders' would include every one
in Livelihood Classes I and IV, but would not be limited to them. It would
1I7

ettAM'E~ lIt:

LIVELIHOOD PAtTE~N-t95t

include every one, not only in Livelihood Classes II and III, but also among
the non-agricultural classes who had some permanent and heritable right in
agricultural land- even though the income thus derived was less important
than some other type 'of income.
With the help of infonnation collected at the census about secondary means
of livelihood it has been possible to compute separate figures for agricultural
landholders and landless agriculturists. These are shown in a statement
annexed to the detailed review of census economic data (ApPENDIX III).
According to this statement, there are 402 landless agriculturists jur every
1,000 agricultural landholders. There are enormous differences in this respect
from state to state. This number (oj landless agriculturists per 1,000 agricultural
ltlndholders) £s smallest £n Uttar Pradesh (161) and Iflrge5t il1 TrtrVancoreCochin (782).
The numbers for other major states, arranged in order, are as follows :
Mysore (190), Assam (235), Orissa (271), Bombay (383), Madhya Bharat (397),
Madhya Pradesh (413), Hyderabad (507), Bihar (510), Rajasthan (544), West
Bengal (609) and Madras (714).

C - Comparison with U.S.A., and Great Britain
I T IS NOT easy to establish detailed comparison with other countries of
the world in respect of the data reviewed ill this. chapter. This is so for a
number of reasons. To begin with, there are little or no published data for a
great many countries. Secondly, not all the available figures are in a comparable
form. Thirdly, the economy of every large country is a complex affair and the
problems involved in expressing it in quantitative terms which can be used for
oomparison of different countries with one another cannot be said to have been
solved satisfactorily.
However, a few comparisons have been attempted in two aspects- where
published figures seemed to permit such comparisons- with the United States
of America and Great Britain. The results are set out in the diagram facing this
page.

38. The first aspect of the comparison refers to what may be called the
'burden of dependency'. If we consider 1,000 self-supporting persons in
118

ACTIVE WORKERS AND DEPENDENTS
(INDIA, GREAT BRITAIN AND U. S. A~
REFERENCES

Persons qged 0-/4 ___________ ._______________ ~

Earm~del'ena'enfs _____

u

_______

u

___________

J~j~

Othl!rs ______________________________________ _
Construction, Transporfation and Other SerVices ____

II

Mil7l'{!j, ManuFacfure and Commerce ____________

~

A.9ricu/fure_, Animal flus6andr,!!, Plan lofton,
Foreslr.!f, fll1nfirt.j and Fishtn,g. __________________ _

Z,500~----------------~----------------~----------------~

(lREAT BRITAIN

INDIA

U.S.A.

CoMPARisON WiTH U.S.A., ANt> GREAr BRtTAtN
India- who are also gainfully employed-, they support by their exertion, themselves as well' as 2,504 other persons. These include 373 persons who are
earning dependants- in other words, only partially dependent on the 1,000
we are considering-; and 26 rentiers and pensioners who, though not a burden
on their own household, are nevertheless supported ultimately by the exertion
of the 1,000 persons we are considering.
In the United States of America the number corresponding to our 2,504 is
only 1,.547. In Great Britain it is even less- it is only 1,207. We do not know
whether these numbers include any persons corresponding to our 373 earning
dependants; and if so, in what number. We may, if we choose, ignore them
altogether (as in the diagram). The difference in the burden of dependency is still
very large.
To a large extent, the difference arises out of the fact that we have a much
larger proportion of infants, young children and grown up children under 15
than in United States or Great Britain. On the scale we are following (viz., 1,000
self-supporting and gainfully occupied persons) the number aged 14 or less
is Idl7 in India, 702 in United States and 496 in Great Britain. While this is an
important part of the explanation, it is only a part. The diagram shows that
even after this number is separated, the remaining burden of dependency is
still heavier in India than in United States or Great Britain. The conclusion
follows- even people of working age are less fully employed in India than
in these countries.
39. The second aspect of the comparison is the distribution of these
1,000 self-supporting persons who are gainfully employed among the diffc.:.rent
sectors of productive activity. The comparison is shown below:
TABLE 19

India

U.S.A.

Greal
Britaiu

A-Agriculture, animal husbandry, f(lrcstry
and fishing

706

128

50

B-Mining, manufacture and commerce

153

45 6

555

C-Other industries and services

141

416

395

1,000

1,000

1,000

-

119

CHAPTER III:

LIVELIHOOD PATTERN-I95I

The numbers in Category A represent broadly the man-power devoted to
food production. The differences verge on the fantastic. In India 706 persons
out of 1,000 are engaged in producing their own food and a small surplus which
just falls short of being sufficient for the other 294. In United States 128 persons
produce a surplus in excess of their own food requirements which not only
suffices for the needs of the other 872 but yields a margin for export to other
countries. In Great Britain a large majority of the people are fed by foreign
producers of food. Even so, the allocation of only 50 to food production is
astonishing.
The differences in the numbers in Category B reflect broadly the differences
in the extent of industrialisation of these countries. Together with the
figures of Category C, they show the great differences that exist regarding the amount of goods and services other than food which the people of
different countries have at their disposal. They mark the distinction between
affluence and poverty.

120

Growth of Population -

I

8g I - I goo

I
I-

~O',
00

Q:en

(!I_

I

~~
UJ

'C--

I-z
~o

0:

~

_J
~..J

:J:J

zo..

ZO

«a..
zu.
0

<{

w

~

J

I

f,
II

-

'\ ,_-,J-.
\

\

-,

1

Growth of Population -

190 I - I 9 I 0

..:

J:

l

~s

II:

I-

0_

:::l

a: 0')

cr I

~ c;.

LL. 0

0

UI

m

DDD~I~II
,

'0

t- Z

' , , '1i
..:
,

0( 0

0:

_J

,~

~

~

."

0( _J

"-

§

:::l :::l
Z Q.
Z 0

"'~ ~ ,•~

0( Q.

~~~
\&III_-..,

o ..•

Z l.L.
0

u.~

W Q'"

ct

0(

~"- ''-" ""
, '"

<:.

:;:•

'-

:!i

iii

~

~

~

'. '",

'w
"-.
t~ W

.
",

,
'0-"
,,~

.~

I

I

"-,;,'
~

"

;z

,
\

\_

...........

-

S
'-

t

,,- , ",

'z c

~

.,

",,._ '", •._ '" '-<:. """
""
<:.
, ~ :::• '<:>" '"
,
t
S
~ "
"
~
"""

'"

UJ

' ,

'"

Gro\\"th of Population -

191 I - I 9~O

::I:

....

~~

a:(\J

(gO)
LLI

00)
..;::::...

LU

.... Z

~o

...J!ci
<...J

::J::J
ZQ.

Zo

«a..
ZLL
«0
UI
~

I',
I

I

I
/
I
I

I
I
I

I

"

I
-

'I, I\~I'
",
\

"

"'_

I

..... "\

\

-,,

Growth of Population -- 189 I - I 920

....:t:

~O'
ON

£to)

(3I

~Oi
a'J

We

.... z

~o

.J~

~.J

::::l:J

Zo..

Zo

«a..

Zu.

«0

UJ
~

"

r--f~I~

\
---"3,

'-

Growth of Population -

192 1.. 193 0

0(

::t

I-

~
0,&

IrM

~

a:
:J

GO)

u.'

ON

en

w'O
~z

irQ

...J !(

«.J

:J:J

Zll.
ZO
«ll.

zu.

«0
LLI

:'.i

I

I

"

"

I
- I

",

"I

\_'

\ ..... -01"\

, -,

,

on

III
<)

..z
.....

I[

III
I[

Growth of Population -

193 I - 1940

«

1:

1

I-

~

0'0'

a: ot

a:

'-

::J

,~

~

,~

~

e

e.g 0')

LL.

~

0 M

en

~~~~II
.. ,

W~

!( Z

,

a::: Q

_, ~

..J
«
::l ::l

Z Q.
Z 0

0( Q.

,c
,,

<
~

"'0111w ....,'"
Z...: t.WI
I.IIUI
_ 00(

(tit

{.jW

,

LIJ

~~ t¥t
~ ~

<::>
t

~

• "

'"
I',
"
"

I
I

I

I
I,

II,

!

~~

;:, .~

t
,

~ ~

~ ~

,,

l

~

,

'" a
'II"
%
::::, ~

l

."

~

" ""

•... •"- '"'t

I

1

~ 'e:." '"<

1

I

•
~
l

&

,

"

~

<Ii

•

"-

.e•d•S
" ...
':"

", ""- '"

o l"

Z L&.
.( 0

"
b

I

'", "'",

~ ~
~

.
<

' ol'

~

~ ~

~d

~~

~1i

,

~

Growth of Population - 1941-195°

<II:

J:

J

I-

~O'

OU)

1

Q::

.~

0:01

~

0

m
L&J c

0(

w

a

: : ! :

I::

:

I

I

I

~

'

"-

. .
~

z~'~

II: ~ •

LU~l
~Q~

0:

~

I

·, ,

.

'-

I"'~

"

'

/
I

!

I
I
/

I

,

I

I "'l

,..1

" \J

"

'\","-""\

'_ .....

\

:

~

l

·· ~·

t

•

~

~ ~

'-.J

•

.
.q
~
~ ~
~

"

~,

.J!'"
.... !t!
~ .~

'"I)~
"~
q
'"

.
·
~

~ ~

~~

l

l~'-

'l

:!;

~

u

:q

.... l

•'- ... • ~

I

I

-!!

'"• '"§ '"

~

:

<:;>

~ ~

~
c c:,
'"
~

l

~

'"

~~

'-

~

••
~
:~

I~
'11>
1:~

:

' I:l

~ ~ 0::.
"G
Q :Ii c::, ~

~

I

I

;

..:. ~

••
~

..o = •~

~

t..

I:l

Ii,

.,

",-:

l ,

.J ~
0( .J

Z LL

•

~m~I~11

~z
o::Q

« 0.

...

"

I

za

,~

0

u. 't'

Z D..

~

0

C!J-

:J :J

!

·
··• ··
~

::l

II')

<:l

"- N

1~

·

;11'
"',!:

•

~

Growth of Population -

192 I - I 950

::t

I-

~

OD"
D:LO

.
··.
·

"0'1
I

u.-

O~

I

•

o

•

I

~

"

\:::,...-

LLJ

I-Z

~O

~

I-

'l

"'- "'-

::J:::l

t

«...I
zo..
ZO
«0.

~

zu.

<{a

UJ
~

I

I
I

I

,I

f

I

7
" \._

I

\

",, " ...-......

-

\

\

,

...J«

-.... ,
1

,

r-J ,'

~
~

'"

Growth Rates for six decades - 1891-19°1 to 1941-1951

an
WI
~­
«T
a:2!
::to
(J)0l

I

~~

a: ~ ~

C!1.!.~,"

..J Ol
IX) II:I

-< - ~
Z an
z w >-

I/)

WO~

<lto
Wa:
~O
IJ..

N

,,
\ ....

oO~

~

•

o

"

0

••
• c
! ~

J

\

&

~

\
..,

~-.-,_

0<
Wu
Ow
z o

r'

r ... ;;;
,.)

,
\.1

Additions to Population during 30 years
before and since 192 I

ADDITIONS 10 POPULATION DURINCi 30 YEARS

BEFORE AND SINCE 19Z1
I,ZOO , . . . - - - - - - - - - -....- -.......- - - - - - - - - - - - .

INDIA
1,000 t-----------+----I~H-------------1

~

x
!II::
<
.J

800~----------~~~~---------~

Z

z 600r----------~~~~---------~
o
too
<_

.J

::J

a.
~ ~Or_---------+--4~~---------~
EAST INDIA
SOUTH INDIA

zoo

NORTH

WEST INDIA

INDEX

1891-19Z0 ____
19ZI-1950 ____

I
1

CENTRAL.
INDIA

NORTH-WEST
INDIA

CHAPTER IV

Before and Since 192 I
A - Growth oj population : checked and unchecked
given in the last three chapters of the number and distribution of people on the land and the pattern of life and livelihood relates
to 195I. But the picture does not remain the same, even for a day; it changes
imperceptibly but nonetheless surely; and the rate of change has been quickening in recent decades. It is necessary that we should have a clear appreciation
of how the picture changed in the past; and also in so far as it is possible to know
this, why it changed as it did and not otherwise. If we succeed in gaining a
correct and complete appreciation of the way in which the wheels of life have
been turning in the past, we shall be able to peer into the future and form a
correct opinion about the changes which are likely to come about in the future.
The future, of course, is not totally determined by the past. Neither is it (as
some are apt to suppose) simply day in our hands to be moulded as we may
fancy. It lies within our power so to influence the course of events as to avert
danger and promote welfare and happiness; but there are very definite limits to
this power. Those who have the responsibility of governance have to distinguish
between right and wrong action with reference mainly to these limits. The
purpose of this chapter is to bring the past under review in such a way that the
course of right action for the future may become at least a linle clearer than it is.
P'E PICTURK

As the census is taken at ten-yearly intervals, OUT unit of time for the
measurement of changes must be the decade. The minimum requirements
for & review of changes must, therefore, be at least two decades before 1951,
in order that the trend of change disclosed by two successive decades might
give us an insight into the decade immediately following the 1951 Census.
This js, however, not long enough. Though we live in a fast -moving
world, we need to look back longer in order to gain a cle2T perspective.
It is proposed in this chapter to review the changes which took place over
six decades- three before and three after the 1911 Census. On the basis of th,s
review, it is suggested that an attempt should be made to visualise the prospect
for 1981.
2.

121

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

As it happens, the choice of 1921 as the central year of the review period
is nol merely convenient- it is a necessity. There is a profound difference
between the trend of growth after that year and the trend of growth in preceding
decades. Dry figures of the census which record the growth of the people
acquire meaning and significance only when the sharp contrast between the
decades before and since 1921 is clearly understood and constantly borne in
mind.

3. The Indian ('..ensus of 1891 was taken over a territory which comprised
India of today as well as Pakistan and Bunna. The internal territorial divisions
were very different. But the
TABLE I
figures of old censuses have been
readjusted to the present limits
and territorial divisions and the
Increase( +)
rea d jus ted figures have been
decrease(-)
during
published. TABLE I shows the
preceding
growth in numbers of the people
Number
decade
inhabiting the territory where the
Census yeaT
(IN LAKHS)
(IN LAKHS)
1951 Census was taken.
4. During the thirty years
4
•
between 1891 and 1920 the number
1911
2.490
+135
of the people increased by 122
Z,481
1921
- 9
lakhs- which is just a linle more
1931
2,755
'+274
than the number of peopJe living
3,128*
1941
+373
in the Pwljab Plain division or
3,569
19.5 1
+44 1
the South Bihar Plain division and
just 8 little less than the number of people living in the Northern division of
Bombay Deccan.
Dwing the ten years between 1921 and 1930 the number increased by
274 lakhs- that is to say, by much more than twice the increase which had
occurred during the preceding 30 years. The addition to the population which
took place during one decade was distinctly larger than the present population
of West Bengal and not far short of the total number of people living in two
major states, Rajasthan and the l1m.jab combined.
During the ten years between 1931 and 1940 the number increased by 373
lakhs- that is to say, by more than three times the increase which had occurred
1901

-According to the 1941 cenlus count, this figure should be 3,148. It is necessary, however, to deduct
Of returns in West Bengal and Punjab. Por a fuller account
ofthi. deduction Bnd the reasonS for the view that the recorded figures of successive cenSU8eS are
sufficiently accurate and comparable, reference may be made to paras 10-15 of ArPEDNIX II.
20 lllkhs, al the estimated allowance for inflation

122

G~OWTH OF POPULATtON:

CHECKED AN]) uNCHECKE:D

during the thirty years 1891-1920. This time, the size of the additional popu·
lation exceeded the present population of Bombay state. It also exceeded the
combined present population of all the North· WesT India states.
During the ten years between 1941 and 1950 the increase has been much
larger than during the previous decades. The addition to the population441 Jakhs- is larger than the combined present population of the West India
states. It is larger than the present population of Bihar and not far short of
the combined present population of West Bengal, Orissa and Assam.

During the thirty years following 1921, our numbers have increased from
roughly 25 crores to 36 crores. The addition- of about 11 crores- is almost
exactly the number of people at present living in North India and Central India
combined,. or in South India and West India combined.
5. When we pause and think of these figures and thdl' implications, the
first reaction is one of wonder whether they could really be true, 01 whether
something has gone wrong with the figures somewhere. It seems so difficult to
believe that 1921-50 could have been so very different, after ali, from 1891-411920.
Though the number of people who are old enough to remember all about 1891
from personal experience must be quire small now, yer almost every person
who is over forty can recaJl enough facts from persona] expenence which might
induce him to distrust these figures.
Reasoning based on common sense and personal experience would
run on some such lines as follows : "We know roughly how many children
are born these days to womenfolk in OUT own families and friends'. We
also know the numbers born to the womenfolk of an older generation
- our mothers and grand mothers. I t is true enough that our womenfolk
do not practise contraception as they do in western countries and so may
have more children. We need not quarrel with the figures given in an earlier
chapter; they are probably correct. But then, this is norhing new. Our
mothers and grandmothers did not praCTise contraception either. They bore
as far as we can judge, just as many children- if not, indeed, more. So, it
cannot be true that our numbers began to increase aU of a sudden because of
any sudden change in the child-bealing habits of our womenfolk. Well then,
if we rule out a large incre.ase of births, then we should assume a sensational
decrease in the deaths to account for the contrast between the two thirty-year
periods. But has there been any such decrease? . We have very grave doubts.
There has, perhaps, been some decrease. It is true that hospitals and dis·
pensaries have been springing up and doctors have increased in numbers. There
are also the public health staffs. Something is being done about vaccination
123

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 192%

and inoculation and the rest of it. New medicines are advertised and sold in
shops. Granted all this, how much do they all am01.Ult to? And what
difference has it made to the viUages of which we have personal know)edge?
Is it true that many more people are living longer? Where is the evidence?
We can recall so many people of an older generation who lived long. In some
ways, perhaps, they were a much hardier type than the present generation.
No, there must be something wrong about these figures."
The reasoning based on common sense and general experience is plausible;
to some extent it is also correct. Yet the conclusion is wrong. There
is no reasonable doubt that the startling differences in the numbers added to
the population during the two thirty-year periods are real. The explanation
would be simple if we draw a distinction between what may be called 'normal
deaths' and 'abnormal deaths'. It is correct that child-bearing habits have
not materially changed. It is also correct that the incidence of normal deaths
has slightly diminished, but not sensationally. The diminution in the incidence of normal deaths is wholly insufficient to account for the contrast between
the JWo periods. The main explanation is that 'abnormal deaths' used
to claim a great many viCllms in the earlier period. They did not oecour or were
prevented jrom occurring during the t.lter period.

6. Before we set out the evidence bearing on this explanation, let us follow
the figures fUrther and examine whether the contrast we are discu~sing is observable in all parts of India or is localised.
TABLE 2
(IN LAKHS)

Increase (+)
Decrease (-)

Number
1891

1921

1951

North India

479
563
426
263
359
269

467
628

632

- 12

90 1

+ 65

+ 165
+273

57
254

75 6
40 7

+ 91

+239

373
242

523

- 9
+ 14

35 0

- 27

+153
+15 0
+108

2.359

2.4 81

3,5(;9

+I22

+ l,oi8

East India
::;outh India

West India
Central India
North-West India
INDIA

124

~~

Zone

1

-

1891-1920 1921-50

-

CROWTB OF POPULAtIoN : CHECKEl> AND UNCHECKED

The contra.c;t, it is clear, is present in all the six zones. In three zones, there
was no increase at all, but a reduction of population in the earlier period. In
one zone, there was a very small increase- which was less than one-tenth of
the increa&e in the later period. 'There was a sizeable increase of population
during 1891-1920 only in two zones-- South India and East India; even here

the combined increase was less than one-third of the increase which occurred
during 1921-50.
7. Figures of a similar nature are furnished below for the different subregions of India :
TABLE

3
(IN LAKHS)

Numb"
.A-

Increase ( +)
Decrease (-)
,--_A..
18!J1-1920 1921-50

Sub-region

1891

1921

1951

Western Himalayan
I .2 Eastern Himalayan

32

35
77

46
124

+3

+ II

+28

+ 47

701

+10

389
259
46

-9

35

498
286
183
26

-9

+ 203
+ 103
+ 76
+ 20

74

72

104

-2

+ 32

115

13 8

-8
+33
-6
+27

+

165
186

107
204
159
21 3

III

101

+ 60

142

161
238

-10

IJ4

136
18 7

157

2II
307

+21
+36

I. I

2. I Lower Gangetic Plains
2.2 Upper Gangetic Plains
2.3 Trans-Gangetic Plains .
2 .4 The Desert .
3. I North-West Hills
3.2 North Central Hills and
Plateau
3·3 North-East Plateau
3 ·4 North Deccan
3· 5 South Deccan
4. I Gujrat-Kathiawar
4·:2 Malabar-Konkan

5. I North Madras & Orissa
{)oastal.
.
.
5.2 South Madras

49

488
295
201

17 1

223

290

239
315

-18

+28

31

+ g6
+ 80
+ 101
+

96

+ 54
+ 84

Seven of these fifteen sub-regions recorded no increase during 1891-1920 but
suffered. a reduction. To this group we should add the Lower Gangetic Plains
whtre the increase was so small in relation to the population that the number
12~

CHAPtER tv: B:£FORE ANn stt.TCI 192t

may be regarded as having been practically stationary. There are thus eight
sub-regions where we counted in 1951 nearly 20 crores of people out of 36
crore!!.

In 1921, there were only 14 crores of people while in 1891 there had
been 141 /a crores of people. The contrast between a decline of half-a-crore
in the first thirty years and an increase of 6 crores in the next thirty years is
unmistakable,
Turning to the other seven sub-regions where population had grown during
the first thirty years, the acceleration of this growth during the second thirtyyears is unmistakable in every case without any exception.
8, The population of India decreased by 0' 2 per cent in 1891-1900,
increased by 5'6 per cent* in 1901-10 and again decreased by 0'4 per cent in
I 9 Il-20, On the other hand during
TABLE 4
the three decades after the 1921
Census, population increased by
Mean Decennial Grawch
10' 4 per cent in 1921-30, 12'7 per
Rate
cent in 1931-40 and 13'2 per cent
r-----'.A.------..
1891-1920 1921-50
in 1941-50. If the average rates
for the two thirty-year periods are
+10'0
North India
considered, population grew bet·
East India
+II '9
ween 1891 and 1920 at the rate of
South India
+1.2 '5
1'7
per cent per decade, while
West India
-1'4
+15'4
Central India
+1'2
+11'2
between 1921 and 1950 it grew
North-Wcst India
+12'2
-3·6
at the rate of 12'0 per cent
per decade. Every zone exhibits
INDIA
+12'0
+1'7
this contrast as
shown in
TABLE 4.

9. If we analyse the figures of increase and decrease during 1891-1900
division by division and group the divisions according to the rates of increase
or decrease recorded, the results are as follows.

Increases were recorded in divisions representing two-thirds of the country
(on a population basis). The increase ranged between 5 per cent and 10 per
cent over two-fifths of the country. Higher rates of increase were recorded
in very small areas, while lower rates of increase were far more common.
The decreases occurred in the parts of the COWltry inhabited by a third
of the people. The rates of decrease were very heavy, exceeding 25 per cent
in Rajasthan Dry Area, Rajasthan Hills, Rajasthan Plateau, Madhya Bharat
·The rate of increase and decrease are expressed as percentages of the mean popUlation of the period during
which the increase or decrease occurred.

u6

GROWTH OF POPULATION: CHECKED AND UNCHECKED

Plateau, Madhya Bharat Hills, Bhopal and Bombay -Gu;rat. Decreases ranging
between 15 and 20 per cent occurred in Saurashtra and North Hyderabad;
between .10 and 15 per cent in Ajrner, Kutch, Vindhya Pradesh, North-West
Madhya Pradesh and East Madhya Pradesh; between 5 and 10 per cent in East
Rajasthan Plain, Uttar Pradesh Hills & Plateau and the Northern division of
Bombay Deccan; and less than 5 per cent in South-West Madhya Pradesh, East
Uttar Pradesh Plain, South Bihar and Himalayan Punjab.
10. The principal reason for these decreases during the decade 189I-I900
must be found in the very severe famines which are known to have raged in the
greater parts of these divisions during the decade. The following reference to
these calamities is extracted from the 1901 All-India Census Report :
"In 1891-92 there was scarcity over a considerable area in Madras and Bombay
and in parts of Bihar. In r895 a weak monsoon led to extensive crop-failure in the
Bout hem districts of the United Provinces, and a sudden cessation of the rains of 1896
resulted in famine in the United Provinces, the Central Provinces and Berar and parts
of Madras, Bombay, Bengal, the Punjab, Upper Burma, Rajputana, Central India and
Hyderabad. Altogether an area of about 300,000 square miles with a population of
nearly 70 millions was affected and on the average, two million persons were relieved
daily during the twelve months from October 1896 to September 1897; the number
rose to more than 4 million at the time of greatest distress.
"In 1899 the monsoon again failed, and the results were even more disastrous, for
though the population affected was slightly les~ than in 1896-97, famine conditions prevailed over an area mlf 8S great again and with less easy means of communications,
the drought was much more severe, the people had not yet recovered from the previous
visitation, the mortality amongst cattle from want offodder and water was far heavier,
and the tracts which suffered most lay for the greater part in Native States, where the
relief organisation was necessarily less perfect than in British territory. In the height
of this famine there were for weeks together over six million persons in receipt of relief,
and the value of the agricultural production of the year was estimated to have been 60
millions sterlingbclowthe average; there was also a loss of some milliom ofcattle. It
is impossible to say with any pretence to accuracy what was the actual mortality
caused. by these ca1amities. The Commission of 1901 thought that about.a million
deaths were attributable to the famine of IB99-1900 in British territory, and it would
probably be safe to assume that another three millions must have occurred in the
Native States, which contained more than three-fifths of the population afflicted and
where the relief operations were generally far less successful. No estimate has been
made of the excess mortality in 1896-97 but it cannot have been much less than 8
million. The total motality due to the two famines may therefore be taken roughly
at five millions. The diminished vitality of the people resulted also in a heavy fall in
the birth rate, but this was to some extent counter-balanced by an unusually high rate
of reproduction when the people had recovered their normal conditions."

Vivid accOlmts of the impact of these famine conditions in many parts of
India (notably Bombay, Berar and the Central Provinces) are fOlWd in
127

CHAPTER IV : BEFORE AND SINCE Ig21

other extracts from census reports which are printed among the papers in
ApPENDIX IV.
1 I. Another cause of heavy mortality during the decade was plague. "Excluding a small tract in the Himalayas where it has long been endemic, bubonic
plague made its first appearance in India in modem times in Bombay City in
September 18g6 and after spreading over the Western Presidency, notwith·
standing the measures taken to prevent its dissemin at; on, gradually extended
its ravages to other parts of India. By the date of the. census the recorded
mortality was nearly half a miJlion, to which Bombay contributed seven-tenths
and Bengal two-thirds of the remainder; Mysore with 33,73 I reported deaths
had suffered heavily in proportion to its population and so too had Baroda
and Hvderabad. The extent to which the actual number of deaths ex(eeded
that reporh.d is uncertain, but it if; known that the difference was very consi·
derable and it may lY assumed that the true mOl talley from plague was not
less than three-quarters of a million and may possibly have been a million."

This brief accoWlt is supported by several rderrnC(.S in local census reports
describing the ravages of plague in different pan8 of the country and assessing
their effect it' arresting the growth of numbers.
Some parts of the country, e.g., Bihar, were vtsited by both famine ar.d
plague at the same time. The figures disclosed- even after full allowance for
errors and uncertainties- an unmistakable stagnation of the rate of growth.
The reports contain a detailed discussion and some difference of opinion as to
which was the more effective check. One report cites a series of comparative
figures tending to show that plague was the real killer and not famine; it seemed
that the decline of population was closely correlated to the knOMl severity of the
incidence of the' plague, while there was not only no decline, but some modest
increase in areas where famine was knoMl to have been severe. According to a
different view it is "extremely probable that the reduction in the rate of increase
of the population is very largely due to a decline in the birth rate induced by the
general rise in the price of staple foodgrains ....... In South Bihar, common rice
is dearer by 26 per cent, maize by 32 per cent and whf;at by 29 per cent, while
during the same period the wages of agricultural J,abourers have fallen by 3 per
cent. Conditions such as th~e can hardly fail to affect the reprcductive energy
of the large class of unskiUed labourers who own no land and have not pani·
cipated in the profits arising from the enhanced prices of agricultural produce.
Nor are they confined to South Bihar. They. extend in varying degrees to all
parts of Bengal and although their influence on the birth rate may not always
be trdceable, we may be sure that it is there".
128

GROWTH OF POPULATION: CHECKED AND UNCHECKED

12. While famine and plague raged over very extensive areas there are also

references to the localised deadliness of epidemics of malaria, kala ·azar and
other fevers. Thus, in the United Provinces, excessive and badly distributed
rainfall in the early years of the decade "led to a severe outbreak of malarial
fever which in 1894, raised the death rate to an exceptional height and sapped
the vitality of the people to such an extent that the biIth rate in 1895 was
unusually low". In Western Bengal, the natural growth was normal in areas
which WEre "recovering from <J cycle of m'1Jaria" bU1 it was only l' 4 per cent
in Hoo~hly "whtre fever is rife and the popuJatirn would have been stationary
but for the influence of the mills and factories of Serampur". In Assam, "kalaazar entered Kamrup and reduced the popUlation of the southern part of the
district by nearly 12 per cent. Having spent its force there, it pa.<;scd on in 1892
to Nowgong where its tract is marked by deserted villages, un-tilled fields, a land
revenue reduced by 23 per cent, and a disheartened population which after 19
years of steady increase has now receded to the figure at which it stood nearly
30 years ago".
13. During the next decade (I901-1O) the seasonal conditions were much
more favourable. The local census reports refer frequently to 'agricultural
conditions' being 'normal' or 'prosperous'. Droughts appear to have visited
their usual haunts in the brown and yellow bclts- followed by scarcity, sometimes even by famine. There is also an isolated reference to crop failure jn the
Coastal division of Orissa. But the days when people died in large numbers
because of local crop failures, seemed to have been ended. To farcsee the
approach of scarcities and famines, to take measures to prevent or mitigate
their actual incidence, and to organise and administer relief so as to save life
with certainty and yet do it economically- all these tasks had been accepted,
learnt and reduced to routine administrative operations. The reports of this
decade contain no suggestion of mortality or other ill-effects ansmg
out of famine. But there were other checks on the growth of population. The
reports show clearly that plague was continuing to take even heavier toll than
in the previous decade. "The mortality from it rose from about a quarter of a
million in 190I to I' 3 millions in I907. It fell below a quarter of a million
in each of the next two years, but in 1910 it exceeded half-a-million. The total
number of deaths from plague during the decade was nearly "6' 5 millions, of
which over one third occurred in the Punjab and two fifths in the United
Provinces and Bombay taken together. The disease fortunately has failed to
establish itself in Bengal, Assam and on the East Coast and in the extreme south
of the peninsula. This, moreover, is only the recorded mortality. As is well
known, when epidemics are raging the reporting agency breaks down and a large

129

CHAPTER. IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

number of deaths escape registration. The omissions are most numerous in
the Native States, where registration is usually far less accurate than in British
territory". Plague was not the only killer during the decade. "Epidemics of
malarial fever decimated the irrigated tracts of the Eastern and Central Punjab
and the Ganges-Jumna Doab in the United Provinces, where, in 1908 alone,
the reported mortality from fevers was nearly two millions". The reference
in these cases is not to the areas where the disease is endemic; but to outbreaks
of the disease in epidemic form. A report from the United Provinces explains
that the "malaria epidemic appears to have made most headway in those districts
where the disease is not as a rule specially prevalent and least in those in which
it is in a high degree endemic".
14. The differences in conditions, thus described, between the two decades
is reflected in the pattern of growth. Whereas in the earlier decade increases
were recorded in two-thirds of the country, they occurred during this decade
in about three-fourths of the country. Areas in which the increase exceeded
10 per cent contained only 4' 3 per cent of the population in the earlier decade,
they contained 26' 4 per cent of the population in the later decade. The area
in which decreases occurred, was limited to three divisions of Uttar Pradesh,
the Punjab, the Patiala and East Punjab States Union and the Southern
division of Bombay Deccan. In the country as a whole, population grew
from 2,355 lakhs to 2,490 lakhs.
IS. The next decade (19II-20) was extraordinary in many ways. The
opening year was unhealthy-a sharp increase in attacks and deaths from plague,
cholera and malaria occurred in widely different parts of the country. ,Then
for five years, there were good seasons and good crops and public health was
much better. The first world war began and ended. The last three years of
the decade turned out to be deadly. Economic disorganisation- the aftermath
of war- coincided with two successive bad seasons and extensive crop failures.
Plague and cholera resumed their sway. Assam reported a recrudescence of
'kala-azar'. In Bengal "malaria was specially severe throughout the period,
which was characterised by a low birth rate and a mortality which in several
districts steadily exceeded the births". But all these misfortunes paled into
insignificance, when a world-wide epidemic of influenza swept the COWltry
from one end to the other in two waves, one closely following the other. A
full account of this terrible visitation will be found among the papers printed
in ,ApPENDIX IV. The account includes a "conservative estimate" of the
mortality at "between 12 and 13 millions for India, a large part of which
occurred in the space of three or four months".
13 0

CROWTH OF POPULATION: CtrECKED AND UNCHECKED

In general) the coastal areas escaped with a Jaw mortality. So also
East India. Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Bombay and Madhya Pradesh suffered
heavily. The rural areas were most severely infected, "the reason probably be:ng
that while villages have no advantage over towns in the matter of overcrowding,
sanitation and ventilation, the urban areas have the benefit of qualified medical
aid and organised effort".

The pattern of growth during the decade 19II-1920 reflected the conditions
thus described. There was an overall decrease from 2,490 laklls in 191I to 2,481
lakh~ in 1921. In the two earlier decades the divisions in which decreases had
occurred were one-third and one-fourth of India (on a population basis). In
this decade, decreases occurred in divisions which contained more than onehalf of the total population of India. Even where increases occurred they were
small; the divisions where increases exceeded 5 pcr cent represented only about
one-tenth of India. The natural checks which restrain the growth of population were seen at their worst during this decade.
16. ~re now reach the turning point. We hear no longer about abnormal
deaths- until we come to the Bengal Famine of 1943.
Already, as mentioned before, fam;ne had lost its terror. In 1921, the
Censu~ Commissioner wrote: "Famine relief organisation is now so highly
perfected in India that scarcity is not necessarily accompanied by high mortality". His successor in 1931 could say: "There has, however, been no serious
famine in the decade under review ............ Improvements in communications,
nowaday~ prevent anything like the famine mortality of a century ago ..... .
Famines were local and not very serious, though one unfortunate district of
Madras had famine declared in it officially for three seasons. "
It was not merely the fruits of victory over famine that the country was
enjoying. A new note of confidence in the fight against epidemic diseases was
beginning to be heard. According to the 1931 Census Report, "Every year
sees improved methods of fighting such epidemics as cholera, plague, or kalaazar. Indeed, a completely effective treatment for the latter pest has been
perfected since the last census, and has made it possible to stamp out the
disease".
Detailed accounts of the course of the seasons and conditions of public
health during the last and earlier decades are given in state census reports
published separately. They need not be recounted here.
Though the usual cycles of vicissitudes of the seasons continued and the
brown and yellow belts of the country continued to suffer from droughts which
caused severe scarcities and sometimes famines, there was no extraordinary

13 1

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

calamity (except the Bengal Famine of 1943). By about 1921, the freedom movement acquired a genuinely national character; and the British Government were
carrying out reforms which culminated in the transfer of power in 1947. There
was a conscious effort to develop 'nation building' services and a spun of activity
occurred in the 'transferred' departments which dealt mainly with public health
and education. For a few years before the outbreak of World War II, when
Provincial Autonomy arrived and popular ministries took charge of Provincial
Governments, further advances were registered. In the result, the organisation
of public health establishments has been steadily strengthened and their methods
of combating epidemic diseases- especially through control of fairs and festivals- have become increasingly efficient. Mention has been made already of
the distinction between outbreaks of malarial fever in the form of epidemics
and their perennial prevalence in many parts of the country where the disease
is endemic. An attack on the latter problem gathered momcntwu during the
last decade. I t seems likely, that in these areas the death rate must have
been consistently higher and the birth rate consistently lower than elsewhere. Though the data are not conclusive there are indications to the effect
that the lethal effects of endemic malaria were getting progressively reduced
during the last thirty years and this progress has been substantially accelerated
during the last decade.

17. We may now go back to our question- Are the figures really true?and our answer that they are. There is no doubt that during the thirty years
before the 1921 Census severe checks of one kind or other were in operat:on
which tended to incre<lse deaths abnormally. Such checks also had the effect,
in some cases, of diminishing the births abnormally. The natural checks on
population growth fall into three groups as below
(z) Famines (including famine diseases)
(ii) Epidemic diseases, and
(iii) Endemic diseases.
These three groups of natural checks were responsible for keeping the 'mean
decennial 1ate of growth' during the first thirty-year period as low as I . 7 per
cent, and actually bringing about a reduction of population in three zones out
of six. Even during 1891-19°0, when the first of these checks, viz., famines
(including famine diseases) were at their height, human intelligence was already
devising and perfecting the counter-checks by which the natural checks could be
prevented from operating. These counter-checks comprised: First, the
creation of conditions in which the development of agricultural production
would be both possible and profitable and take place of its own accord; Secondly,

132

Droughts and Floods during 30 years before and since 1921

DROUQHTS AND FLOODS BEFORE AND SINCE 1921
(SOURCE: RAINFALL AND AGRICULTURE BY SHRI L. A. RAMDAS)

INDEX.
DROUQHTS _____ •
FLOODS ______ 0

..... ...
,.
~l
~.
... ~~
~ ~
J ::.!.

- i{ i ~1
... ....

e tI

~

~

ts

.~

II)

'»

"I
~ "~ (I .
Q; ~
\l
~
~
OJ
ot:QJ :::i ::::i (._'
'q; QJ ~
tI

III

--92'

~!?
96

97
1-. 98

99

1900
f01

()Z

~~
04
os

•

•

1891

,--93
94

~

••

.

0

I

.~.

_L

0
0

'

~

f--. It

13
14
-

15

~~

..

--t

.Q.. f-C? f---

LB.- 0

0

_-- _-:: '-.-f--

ISZO

I---~?

•

---Z-s'

0

0

0

-

0

•
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

-

T~~~

0

1--_?_7
~8

.-

Z9

~
31

0

0

0

0

--

0

.

[

1--

.<L. f--Q_f--.
0

38

39

•

0

- ..

0

-.--,

0
0

'RIIIT£D IY THE MMUllt.

0

•

0

• •
0

0

-- .
t-- --f-

•

0
0

0

0

-1-.

0

0
0

0

0

0

I---

0

34

0

..
..

0

_._.. _-

tI I -~

•

0

~

. _._-+--

0

I- 33

0

-

0

0

0

I--~.f?

r-J_z.,

_.

0,

0

I-_.e_::l.
l4

..

.

~ ..

_

0

()- 1--- ---- 0

-_ . - - I-

••••••
'i
_
Jt • • • • • •
•••••••
_.. 1.' •
•••• ••
•
•
0 ·-o---t
..~.

t-- f: 1

..._

-

...

._ f---

0

..... -

f-._JJL

._-

..

.. -

0

-

{)

~6_ t-

_

0

••••••• •

r •• . •• ..
I ••

0

~?

0

0
0

•

...~-

-l-Q_
-.l-

t-- .11

••

0
0

0

• •

it
0

I

Q_

f-:-._Q.~.

1940
~I
4Z
43
44
4S
46
47
48
1949

0

0

0

."
•
•
•
••
•
-t-·· • •
._
•
.+."l-- ±-~.
,

~7

1--'35
f---..
36
37

~j

0

0

• • +tI_
.._

4:

1:1

c: ~I::

0

J>-f-- I ~Q:.

1--.Q.8.

I -__

0

III

0

0
0

•

()

06

f--.

0

~

J -=

0
0

- ...

" l1~

I..
~ III
I.
,~
..Q ;Jl ~§ ~~
1:1
~"" ~
-.lC oQ~
~ ~ ~~ ~~ ~~
~~
~~ ~ ~c8
.~ .~Iu .~ 1,9 t~ III'- a.: ~ c: 0"
It: ~ ~l ~S co c.i ti ~ q)~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~: ~~ ~&

0

0

~ ...

0

•••

0

0
0

0

0

0

'0

0

-- --

0

l. 0
0

eon.... DT., ''''A PIIOTI LITHO '1.11 ••,. DIL.III.

0

0

GROWTH OF POPULATION : CHECKED AND UNCHECKED

the development of transport and communications (so as to open up all areas
liable to scarcity and famine and thereby ensure the availability of commercial
supplies of food grains); and Thirdlv, the organisation of efficient administrative
arrangements for provision of employment and wages to the landless rural people
in those places and at those times when prolonged and severe droughts occurred
and they were unemployed and without purchasing power. So much for the
counter-checks on one group of natural checks.
The counter-checks devised for dealing with the other natural checks are
more obvious. They consisted of hygiene and medicine brought to bear
on the problem through departments of public health, and the gradual growth
in numbers of the medical profession. There can be 110 doubt that 'he
counter-checks proved effective and succeeded in eliminating the operation
of one of these natural checks and materially diminished the incidence of
olhers.

I8. It would, however, be an excessive claim to attribute the whole of this
improvement to human intelligence. Nature also seems to have heen kindlier.
Some statistics compiled by the Meteorological Department, which are shown
in the diagram facing this page appear to show that as between the two thirtyyear periods under study, the earlier period was worse favoured by nature than
the later one. Droughts were clearly more frequent and more widespread In
the earlier period. The difference is also reflected in the occurrences of
excessive rain which not only cause floods but help to start outbreaks of
epidemic diseases.
19- The Bengal Famine of 1943, as is well known, marked a tragic reversal
of this trend towards elimination of abnormal deaths. The circumstances in
which this reversal took place are recorded in the report of a statutory Commission of Inquiry. Relevant extract() from the report of this Commission
will be found in ApPENDIX IV.
Notwithstanding the very full account given in this report, there is very
Lttle public realisation of the fact that the occurrence of this famine marks a
new phase in the effort to combat famine in this country.
A basic assumption underlying the classic methods of prevention and relief
of famine has been the presence within the country (which formerly included
not only India and Pakistan but Burma also) of an overall surplus of foodgrains.
The presence of this surplus was a guarantee _that commercial supplies of
foodgrains would become available at -any place and at any time in the quantities needed. A physical shortage of supplies was not a contingency to be
I~3

"

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

I

guarded against. So long as the basic assumption remained valid, the old
methods which were designed merely to inject purchasing power proved successful in saving life, But the growth of population (induced in part by the success of
these very methods) has brought t he country and the people face to face with a
new situation in which this assumption is no longer valid. The implications
of this change are far reaching, Let us note that fact; we shall revert to it
later.
20. We may conclude This section with a comparison of the rates· of population growth experienced in India with those of other countries of the world
and other times,
The 'mean decennial growth rate' in India, as already explained, was 10' 4
per cent in 1921-30, 12'7 per cent in 1931-40, and 13'2 per cent in 1941-50.
The last mentioned rate is the difference between a 'mean decennial birth rate'
of 40 per cent and a 'mean decennial death rate' of 27 per cent.

The 'mean decennial growth rate in thr United States of America appears
to have been 19'0 (19 10), 13'9 (19 2 0), 14'9 (1930) TO (1940) and 13'5 (1950).
In the United Kingdom, the rate was 9.6 between 40 and 50 years ago and 4' 4
during the last twenty years, Recent figures for France indicate a decline;
increases were registered during 1921-30 at the rate of about 6 per cent. The
figures for Italy yield rates in the neighbourhood of 6, 7 or 8 per cent for
several decades. The rates for Japan appear to be running consistently higher
than the rates for India- in lhe neighbourhood of 14 per cent.
In general, Western European rates of growth are distinctly lower than in
India even though their death rates arc lower than in India. This is due to the
fact that Western European peoples practise contraception and thus succeed
in keeping the birth rate at a much lower level than ours; though, if they
imposed no such checks, their womenfolk are likely to have at least as many
children as our womenfolk do have. In the United States of America the
people practise contraception. But their birth rate (though distinctly lower
than in India) is higher than in Western European countries. Their death
rate is very low. In the result. they are keeping up a rate of growth similar to
ours and much higher than in Western European coum ries.

It is necessary, if possible, to
ascertain how the present total strength of mankind has grown, in order to'
determine whether there is such a thing as a 'natural' rate of growth. As might
21. This is the position in recent years.

·While great care has been taken to work out these rates from authoritative sourcei, their accuracy cannot
be guaranteed in all cases, The decimal points Ire rcfinement~ which mean very little; the integers may not.
be too far out,

134

GROWTH OF POPULATION: CHECKED AND UNCHECKED

be expected, we have very little statistical information of the kind we have
been discussing so far. Yet, we are not entirely ignorant on the subject; there
are a number of books where the results of expert study of all available data
about world population are set out. It is true that much of this study consists
of piecing together fragmems of ascertained fact with a good deal of guesswork. But the guess-work is not arbitrary; it represents the best judgment of
scholars who are well qualified to form an opinion and also free from conscious
bias. A brief summary of relevent information of this nature is given below.
Round about 1750, the total strength of mankind consisted only of 73
crores of people. Our own numher- it will be recalled- is 36 crores tuday.

Thus lWO hundred years ago, the whole world contained only twice as many human
beings as there are in India alone today.
Out of these 73 crares, only lI/~ crares lived in what was then a New World
(America and Oceania), 71'/2 crores of people lived in the Old World- ~8
crores in Asia, 14 crores in Europe, and 91/l crores in Africa.
Fifty years later (about 1800), the world population had increased to something between 90 and 91 crores. This was a modest rate of growth- only 4·4
per cent per decade. The New Wor1d was growing fastcr- the rate was 12·4
per cent mainly because its growth was being fed by migration from Europe.
Asia and Europe grew by 4·5 and 5"7 per cent respectively. It is worth noting
that even then, Europe was sending migrants to the New World and yet growing
slightly faster than Asia Africa was not increasing; there was in fact a slight
decline in numbers.
Fifty years later (about 1850) the population of the world was nearly II7
crores- the rate of growth was 5" I per cent per decade. The New World
was growing more than three times as fast- 15·5 per cent per decade. The
tempo of European growth was getting faster- it was now TO per cent against
Asia's 4·4 per cent. Mrica, too, was beginning to add to its population, though
at a very slow rate- I· g per cent.
After another fifty years (about 1900), the population of the world was
161 crores. The rate of growth shows a definite sign of acceleration; the world
average rate was now 6·3 per cent per decade. It is, however, still the New
World and Europe moving ahead- the former was growing at the rate of 16·S
per cent per decade and the latter at 8·1 per cent. Asia stayed behind w:th 4·5
per cent; but Africa had now caught up to that rate.
When the present century opened, the distdbution of world population
had changed as shown in TABLE 5 on next page

135

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE I921
TABLE

5
1'7.';0

1900

,-----"

Number Percentage

, ,'---"---"""

(IN
a/world
CRORES) popu/alion

Country

Number Percentage
(IN
CRORES)

o/world

population

Africa

9'5

13

12'0

Asia
Europe

47'9
14'0

66

93'7

19

4°'1

8
58
2.5

J'4

2

15'0

9

72 '8

100

160'8

100

New World
We,TtU) TOTAL

The population of Europe and the New World had grown from heing about onefifth of the world i"l pdHlion in 1750 to about one-third in 1900. The population of Asia i:md. A.Ji iea htld also grown in ~bsolute numbers; but since their
rates of growth were so much slower than in Europe and the New World, their
relative proportion diminished. from about four-fifths to two-thirds,
This was the position in or about 1900. During the last fifty years the
practice of contraception has grown, and become part of the normal mode of
conjugal life among the majority of the people in Western Europe and people
of their stock inhabiting the New World. As a result, their birth rates have
been falling fast. Their death rates had already begun to fall much carlier
during the lust century. This was the result partly of the fact that the masses
of the people had begun to eat more food and better food than they had ever
known bdlm::, and partly of the fact that water supply and sanitation, hygiene,
So long as the birth rates
and medicine had begun to make progress.
remained sationary while the death rates fell, the growth rate was well ahead of
the rest of the world. Hence the difference in the figures of Asia and Europe
already observed. But when the European peoples started contraception and
the habit grew, the birth rates fell faster than the death rates- with the result
that the European rate of growth has been falling. During the last half-century
the mean decennial growth rate of Europe has been 6' 0 per cent per decade;
while that of Asia is higher, viz., 6'8, Mrica has forged ahead with 9' 3 while
the rate in the New World has dropped from 16'8 to IS'!.
The latest position (round about 1950) seems to be as follows. World
popUlation is now 239 crores- well over three times the number of 175 0 .
Europe and the New World have about 88 crorcs which is well over a third of

136

GROWTH OF POPULATION: CHECKED AND UNCHECKED

the population of the world. Asia and Africa have 151 crores which is well
below two-thirds of the population of the world. If the trends of the last
fifty years continue to operate during the next fifty years, the numbers of the
European peoples should become stationary (if not declining) and Asia ~U1d Africa
should keep growing even faster than at prcscnt- the rate of growth in the New
World falling to the same level. But, there are good reasons to think (as will
appear later in this report) that the '1/' is a very big onc, and the assumption
is Wllikely to hold good.
22. In the account given above, it has been asserted that the decline during

the latest half-century of the rate of growth of \Vestcm European peoples and
people of the same stock in the New World- which is an observed fact which
admits of no doubt- has been caused by the development of the practice of
contraception. Until recently, this statemcnt- though widely suspected to be
probably truc- could not be regarded as firmly established by adequate evidence. During the thirties, a theory was in VOhTUC : that the observed f.'lH in the
birth rate was a biological phenomenon- independent of conscious human
volition. There was, it was asserted, a law of nature which induces a fall in the
birth rate among people who achieved rising standard~ of living. l~vcn
now one still comes across 1his idea, in some fOfm or other. But it is
no longer necessary to invoke an unproved biological law in order to
explain something which needs no further explanation, if the practice of
contraception can be demonstrated to be both widespread and effective.
This demonstratjon is now available. The Royal Commission on Population in the United Kingdom has collected and analysed a mass of evidence
and the findings of that Commission are conclusive. Relevant extracts from
the papers of this Commission will be found in ApPENDIX VII. The findings
of the Commission confirm (what is also indicatcd by a good many other
enquiries conducted in the Vnitcd SWtes of America and certain Western
European countries) that the practice of contraception by sufficiently large
numbers of people is the main operative cause of falling births f<ltC.o;;, They
also indicate that the alleged biological law is wllikcly to be true illld that an
improvement of the nutritional standard or other standards of living is by no
means incompatible with the maintenance of a high rate of chjld-bearing, if
the people so desired.
23. One more comment is necessary on the figures showing the rate of growth
of population in different parts of the world. It may be agreed that an increase
of population of the order of between 10 and 15 per cent per decade is biologically natural and has been experienced by many of the advanced countries of

137

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

tbe world and is still experienced by some of them. Whether Of not this can
continue inde1initely in future is a question of high importance for mankind
as a whole. The question is at present involved in acute controversy into which
we need not enter at this stage. One thing, however, is certain. It could not
have been a normal characteristic of human history for an indefinite period
in the past.
Within the laljt two hundred years mankind has more than trebled its
numbers- and this has happened while the rate of growth per decade was very
much lec;;s than 10 per cent. We can easily see that even the rate which actually
prevailed during the last two centuries- trebling in two centuries- must be
regarded a,,> abnonnal and very much faster than in preceding centuries. On
any other supposition, we must be led to the conclusion that, when Emperor
Asoka ruled (273-232 RC.), and was sending his missionaries to various countries of the world, the whole of mankind must have numbered only a few tens
of thousands- which is absurd! We shall not sec the picture of human growth
in its proper perspective unless we realise that what we feellO be a 'biologically

natural' rale of growth is by no means natural in the sense of having re{{ularly
occurred at all places from time immemorial. The exact opposite is nearer
the truth. The rates of growth which we are discussing should, therefore, be regarded as an episcde in an altogether exceptional epoch in human
history. This epoch is probably now drawing to its close. With this observation, we may leave the world figures alone for a willIe; imd return to India and
limit ourselves again to a review of changes which occurred during a much
shorter period- viz., thirty years before and since 1921.

B-

Decline oj Cultivation per capita

THE OBJECT of this section is to analyse the growth of population durin g
the last sixty years in relation to the growth of cultivation during the same period
It is, nowadays, generally agreed that cultivation has been failing to keep pace
with population- but the extent of this default has not bt.,"'en assessed quan:itative1y. So long as the matter remains vague, there is a tendency to refrain
from facing or accepting the implications of that fact; and it is not unusual to
find people denying the fact altogether, when they find its acceptance leads to
unpalatable conclusions.
13 8

DECLINE OF CULTIVATION PER CAPITA

lS· It is not the least difficult among many baffling problems which Governme~t~ have to face in J eeent years, that they are frequently obliged to make
dec1SlOns of far-reach.i:1g import, vitally affecting the economic and social life
of the people; and yet they have to do this on the basis of data which are of
uncertain accuracy, w_complete and consequently inconclusive for purposes
of resolving differences of opinion objectively. In the result, there is great
temptation for people to believe the facts to be what they would like
them to be. Contrary to general belief, this situation is not peculiar
to India. It is prevalent, to a greater or lesser degree, in every country
in the world. In general, the change-over from laissez fairc to economic
and social planning has been too rapid for the statistical systems adequate
to the former, being satisfactorily developed and adapted to meet the
needs of the latter. These difficulties should be neither underrated nor overrated. They merely mean that we have to grope our W~ly for a time, bcfi)re we
improve the system of statistical intelligence adequately. It is not as if it
.
For
is altogether impossible to find the right way even in our semi-darkm'Ss_
this purpose, we can and should make much better use of the statistic~ which
we possess and which we can increasingly procure as we go along facing and
solving our problems. In particular, we 5hould do well to refrain from indiscriminate self-condemnation just a..c; much as uncritical laudation. Strange
as it may seem, it is true that in some respects we are even better equipped with
good statistics than a great many other countries of the world. In other respects, much improvement can be secured merely by a systematic endeavour
critically to assess the degree of goodness and badness of our statistics, and
effecting careful separation of the grain from the chaff.

26. These preliminary observations of a general nature are necessary in
order to introduce the data relating to 'population and land use' which are printed

as ApPENDIX I.

An introductory note will be found among these papers where a full
explanation is given of the ~ources from which the data were secured, the
care taken to scrutinize and sift them, and the extent to which useful and
reliable data are in fact available.
Statistics of land and of its cultivation are of a..c; great importance as statistics
of the people and their hirth, death and growth. Cultivation statistics fall into
two parts- those relating to acreages and those relating to yields. Just ao;; our
census statistics are of better quality than our statisics of births and deaths, so
also our statistics of cultivated acreages are very much better than our statistics
of the yield of crops. Not all parts of the country arc equally weU-equipped
139

CHAPTER IV : BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

with good acreage statistics. It can, however, be said that over the greater
part of India acreage statistics are probably as good as the very best in the world.
Among the areas for which acreage statistics of good quality are available, not
all possess a continuous series over a sufficiently long period of years. It is,
however, possible to select the areas for which comparable statistics of good
quality arc procurable for the sixty-year period with which we arc concerned
in this chapter. The figures which are now to be presented relate to areas
which were selected solely from this point of view and no other.

27. Districts under sLUdy- The figures relate to all the districts of eight
natural divisions and some of the districts of five other divisions. Nearly 12
crores of the people of India live in this territory, and their distribution by zones
is gi ven below :

North India:

Eac;t Uttar Pradesh Plain, Central Uttar Pradesh Plain,
parts of West Uttar Pradesh Plab and Uttar Pradesh Hills
and Plateau (1951 Population- 591 lakhs).
South India: Madras Deccan, \\:rest l\1adras, Mysore, and parts of South
Madras (I951 Popl'lation- 300 lakhs).
West India: Bombay Deccan Southern,
parts of Bombay Deccan
Northern and Dombay-Konkm (1951 Popula6on-I771akhs)
Central India: North-West iV\adhya Pradesh and South-West Madhya
Pradesh (1951 Population- IIO lakhs).

In 1891, the popUlation ofallthcsc'districts was 8151akhs. It increased to 833
lakhs in 1921, the rate of growth during I891-1920 being 0'7 per cent per
decade. It has since increased to 1,179 lakhs in 1951- the rate of growth
durjng 1921-50 being 11·5 per cent per decade. [For the country as a whole,
it will be lccDlled the rMC'S ()f glOW1h were I ·7 per cenl per decade in the earlier
period and 12'0 per cent pel' decade in the later period.]

28. Area (if cultivated land per capita - ALL AREAS - It is generally knO\vn
that the net area of land on which some crop or other is raised, fluctuates from
year to year - increasing when the rainfall is adequate and timely and
decreasing when it is inadequate or untimely. In order to obviate or at any
rate reduce the errors which would arise hy comparing good years with
bad ones, the average area of cultivated land during a consecutive period of
five years next preceding each census year has been computed.

It is found that the area of cultivated land in the districts which we are
studying was 890 lakhs of acres in 1891. It tell to 840 lakhs in 1901 (thus
reflecting the effects of the famines we have noted already) and then rose to 9I~
l40

~

5:ctll)

.

CJ~
I

UJ!
Q.

III

ZZ

2
0_Ill

~~

::>0

!i

..,

a:cn

\,

~

r

\

l

~

\

\

\I

\,

,

N

ll..

' ..\

~

~
I,i
~

,..0 ....
_.lUI

:JI-

o~
oJ

~UI
III

, II

....
,I,

~

II

"

II)

o

II)

o!:2

zLJJ~

a:

....

I~ ~

I

o

•

•

!

r

I

'

/

I
I

I
i

I
I

I
I

'~, ,
\

\,

,
'\

,

I

('

" \,

I
\,~

... -"

.J

DECLINE OF CULTIVATION PER CAPITA

lakbs of acres in 191 I. Further growth of acreage of net area sown is as follows:
927 lakhs in 1921,943 lakhs in 193 I, 958 lakhs in I941 and 991 lakhs in 1951.
If we divide the area of cultivated l:md by the population at each censuswe obtain a figure showing the 'area of cultivated land pcr capita'. If this
figure remains the same from census to census, then the increase in the area of
cultivated land has kept pace with the increase of population. If it fell from
census to census, then it me;:.ans that the former is not keeping pace with the
latter; and (other things being equal) the share of l()()d and other produce of
cultivation available to each individual is diminishing. The results for the
districts under studv
arc shown in
TABLE 6
.J
TABLE 6.

Area of ctlltivaled lal1d

I t will be seen that during the first
Census year
(IN CENTS)
thirty-year period, the area of cutivated land per capila moved up and
109
down slightly and was a little higher
10 3
I90r
at
the end than at the beginning.
Jog
19 II
The second thirty-year period preIII
1911
1
193
sents a very difl~rcnt picturc- the
1941
area dropped steadily from census
195 1
to census. It came down from 111
cents to 84 cents. The magnitude of this drop is very substantial~ nearly oncquarter of the 192 I level.
per capiTa

29- Area of culli'l.!aced lalld per capita-- UTTAR PRADESH- The districts
under study have a total population in 1951 of 59 1 lakhs against 632 lakhs for
the zone. The coverage is thus very extensive. We find that the area of cultivated land was 329 lakhs of acres in 1891. It fell to 313 lakhs in 1901, rose to
333 lakhs in 19II and 337 lakhs in 192 1. Then the acreage dropped to 332
lakhs in 193 I) rose to 346 lakhs in 1941 and then by a further big spurt rose to
362 lakhs in 1951. Having regard, generally, to the progress of cultivated
acreages, thi') was goad gl)ing. nut in relation to the rate of growth of popuiation between 1921 and 19)0, it was not. The area of cultivated land per capita
changed* as follows: 74 cents in 1891, 69 cents in 1901, 75 cents in 19II, 78
cents in 1921, 72 cents in 1931, 66 cents in 1941 and 61 cents in I951 •
• As explained in Chapter r;wc must not be misled hy <1iifcrcllccs ill the an:a of land per capita in two
different parts of India, into thinking that the larger area is nccc:;sarily capablc of yielding more food. But
when we are considering the same part of the country at different periods of time, the change in the area
from decade to decade docs signify- in the absence of more intensive cullivation- a corn:aponding
diminution of food and other produce of cultivation.

14I

ettAPTER

tv:

f3EFOkE ANn SINCE ):9~1 ,

The trend in the four different divisions of this zone is shown in TABLE 7.
It will be observed that the area of
TABLE 7
culti vated land per capita was
Area of cultivated land
slightly higher everywhere in 1921
percapha
than in r891. In 1951 it has
(IN CENTS)
,--_--A.-_-----.
dropped everywhere. The magni1891 1921 1951
Natural division
tude of this drop is between
one-fifth and one-fourth of the
East Uttar Pradesh
Plain
1921 level in the three plains
53
Central Uttar Pradivisions. It is somewhat smallerdesh Plain.
. 65
72
55
about one-sixth of the 1921 levelWest Uttar Pradesh
in
the hills and plateau division.
Plain
82
Uttllj" Pradesh Hills
& Plateau.
. 124

30. Area of cultivated land per
Here,
it was found necessary to omit the whole of North Madras and the greater part
of South Madras- even though the areas involved are very large and excellent
acreage statistics are available for them; and even though the remaining areas are
not quite typical of South India as a whole. But the omission was necessary
because zamindari villages lie interspersed with raiyatwari villages in most of these
districts and they did not acquire proper statistics until after 191I. So the districts under study comprise only a population of 300 lakhs, against the zonal
total of 756 lakhs. The coverage is relatively small and, as indicated already,.,
not altogether typical of South India. Such as they are, the figures yield the
following story. The area of cultivated land was 186 lakhs of acres in 1891.
It rose to 1:92 lakhs in 1901. [It will be recalled that the famines of the last
decade (I891-I900) were not severely felt in this part of India. Some of these
areas had suffered severely in a still earlier decade and one (lying in the brown
beJt) is accustomed to droughts and failure of crops recurring at more or less
regular intervals).] The rise continued to 204 lakhs in I9II. Then there was
a drop to 2021akhs in 1921, followed by a rise to 209lakhs in 193I. This again
rose to 210 lakhs in 194I and dropped to 204 lakhs in I951. It appears that
cultivation had become virtually stationary at the 200 lakhs acre level; such
changes as occur represent only the fluctuations of the seasons~ It is noteworthy that both in 1931 and in 194I, the five-year average should be somewhat
bigberthan in I951 and I921. In both of these terminal periods there are well
authenticated reports of an abnormal succession of seasons of inadequate rain.
!IS

c~pita- MADRAS-MYSORE-

A stationary level of cultivation involves the consequence that the entire
increase of population will be translated into a steep decline of the area of

142

DEcLINE OF CtrLtIVATION PER cilitA
cultivated land per capita. Hence the following figures for the latter: 102 centS
in 1891 and 1901, 101 cents in 191I, 96 cents in 1921,91 cents in 1931,82 cents
in 1941 and 68 cents in 1951.
The trend in the different divisions is shown in TABLE 8. South
Madras and Mysore show 8
TABLE 8
drop even during the first
thirty-year period. All the four
Area of cultivated land
divisions show very substantial
per capita
(IN CENTS)
drops during the second thirty'1891
1.021
19;.'1 year period.
The drop in the
Natural division
later period varies in the three
South Madras
80
68
49
.Madras divisions from 25 to 28
2
West Madras
36
44
3
per cent of the 1921 level; while
Madras-Deccan
184
197
147
in Mysore, it is as much as 33 per
10
Mysore
J20
5
70
cent of the 1921 level.
7

v

31. Area of cultivated land per capita - BOMBAY - The districts under
study have a total population in 1951 of 177 lakhs against a total of 407
lakhs in West India. A sizeable proportion is covered- but the areas excluded
(Bombay-Guirat, Saurashtra and Kutch) are not similar to the areas covered.
The area of cultivated land was 212 lakhs of acres in 1891.
It dropped
heavily to 187 lakhs in 1901 - for these areas suffered severely from famine. It
recovered to 205 lakhs in I9II and there has been a steady growth since then to
21 7 lakhs in 1921, 228 lakhs in 1931, 233 lakhs in 1941 and 260 lakhs in 1951.
Nevertheless, this growth has fallen far short of the growth of population since
192 I. The area of cultivated land per capita changed as follows: 201 cents
in 1891, 18 7 cents in 1901, 188 cents in I9II and 205 cents in 192I. Then, a
steady decline to 188 cents in 1931, 171 cents in 1941 and 147 cents in I95I.
The trend in different divisions is shown in TABLE 9. The drop from 1921
TABU 9
to 1951 is quite substantial in all the
three division s- being 30, 26 and
Area of cultivated land
31 per cent respectively of the 1921
pc", capita (IN CENTS)
r
..._-~
level.
N alural division

Bombay Deccan
Northern
Bombay Deccan

1891

23 0

1921

226

1951
I59

32. Area of cultivated land per
capita - MADHYA PRADESH -

Only two divisions of Madhya
Pradesh are considered in this very
Bombay-Konkan
50
extensive zone. The total popUlation in 1951 is lIO lakhs against the zonal total of 523 lakhs.
Southern

226
62

243

180

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

In 1891, the area of cultivated land was 163 Iakhs of acres. It dropped to
149 lakhs in 1901 - this reflects the severity of famine. Then the acreage rose
to 175 lakhs in 1911, fell slightly to 171 lakhs in 1921, rose again to 174 lakhs in
1931, declined to 169 lakhs in 1941 and has further declined to 165 lakhs in
1951 (which is not much above the 1891 level). This is somewhat exceptional
experience. The general rule is for some growth to be kept up- even if it be
modest and far short of the rate at which population is growing. It is not
altogether clear why an absolute decline should have occurred- seasonal
conditions seem unlikely, wholly, to explain it.
The result is that the area of cultivated land per capita was more or less
stationary during the first thirty-year period- 196 cents in 1891, 191 cents in
1901, 198 cents in 19B as well as 1921; and has then steadily declined to lSI
cents in 1931, 164 cents in 1941 and 1.;19 cents in 1951.
The two divisions show slightly different features. In North-West Madhya
Pradesh the area rose from 173 cents in 1891 to 185 cents in 1921 and has since
fallen to 143 cents in 1951. The drop is 23 per cent of the 1921 level. In
South-West Madhya Pradesh, there was a small drop even in the first period
from 220 cents in 1891 to 2II cents in 1921 and has since dropped heavily to
I56 cents in 195I. The latter drop is 26 per cent of the 192I level.

33. Intensification of cultivalion versus extension- The facts reviewed so far
leave no room for doubt that there has been such a drop in the area of cultivated
land per capita during the thirty years since 1921, that (other things being equal)
every man, woman and child must expect to get distinctly less food and other
agricultural produce from the land at the end of the period than at the beginning.
The magnitude of the drop- as we saw- is about one-sixth in only one division
of Uttar Pradesh, between one-fifth and one-fourth in three divisions of Uttar
Pradesh, and well in excess of one-fourth elsewhere.
We shall follow up the implications of a drop in the productivity of cultivation per capita. Here we should clear up, as far as possible, the connection
between a drop in the area of cultivated land per capita and a drop in the produc..
tivity of cultivation- for the two things are not identical. It is obvious that a
drop in the area of cultivated land per capita, from say 72 ccnts to 55 cents (such
as has occurred in Central Uttar Pradesh Plain), need not necessarily entail a
drop in production of crops of the same order (24 per cent) or even any drop
in production at all in certain circumstances. In theory it is possible that more
intensive cultivation could have been practised so that the yield per acre
increased in 1951 by 24 per cent as compared with the yield per acre in I921.
Now, the statistics of yield per acre are much more open to controversy than the

144

DECLINE OF CULTIV AnON PER CAPITA

statistics of ac~eage; and having taken all this trouble to arrive at valid conclusions OD the basis of convincing statistics, we should not (in this chapter at any
rate) get involved in controversies.
Let us consider the differ~nt ways in which an increase in the yield per
acre can be brought about. One way is for two or more crops to be raised on the
same land in the same year, where only one was raised before. Another is for
an irrigated crop to be raised, where the crop was formerly unirrigated.
A third method is for more manures and fertilisers to be llsed on the same area
of land. A fourth way is to use better seed, use more appropriate methods,
and devote greater care and attention to seed-heds, seedling and the growing
plant.
Let us call these f(.-mr methods more double-cropping, more irrigation,
better fertilisation and better culture. It;s very difficult to measure the last
two items, quantitatively. Even if this may be possible in future we have got
very little of quantitative data for the past, in respect of manuring of land or the
efficiency of husbandry. But we do have data about the first two in terms of
double-crop acreages and irrigated acreages. In other words, a part of the process of intensification of cultivation (very probably the most important part)
is reflected in acreage statistics in just the same way as extension of cultivation.
It can therefore be studied in the same way. If we find that the double-crop
area and irrigated area increased at a faster rate than the growth of populationso that they could have offset the effect of the area of cultivated land lagging
behind the growth of population- then all would be well. If we do not find
this, then we would have gone a long way near measuring the decline in the
productivity of cultivation per capita, as distinguished from the area of cultz''lJ(1#d kzn4 per capz'ta.

34. Double-crop area per capila- The gross area sown less the area of
cultivated land (or net area sown) may be referred to a~ the 'double-crop
area '. In 1891, this was 99 lakhs of acres in all the districts under
study. About 10 per cent of the area of cultivated land at that time was doubJecrop area. By 1921, the double-crop area rose to 109 lakhs of acres which was
nearly 12 per cent of the area of cultivated land at the time. In other words,
the first thirty-year period saw double-cropping increasing at a slightly faster
rate than cultivated hUld. The growth of population had been slower than
both. By 1951, the double-crop area had increased to I25 lakhs, which is
nearly 13 per cent of the area of cuitivattd land. The double-crop area ha'i
grown during the second thirty-year period, a shade faster than the area of
cultivated land- but nowhere near the rate of growth of population.

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE I921

When these areas are dividtd by the population figures, we get the doublecrop area per capita as follows: 12 cents in 1891, 13 cents in 1921, and 10
cents in 1951. The table below shows that the picture is much the same in all
four zones:
TABLE 10

Double-crop area per capita
(IN CENTS)

North India distric:ts
South India districts
Wcst India districtli .
Central India districts
ALL DISTRICTS UNDER STUDY

1891

19:!'1

10:;1

18
7
4
4

19
8

15
7

12

5

4

)

6

13

10

35. Irrigated area per capita- The total area irrigated (reckoning the irrigation
of two successive crops in the same year on the same land twice) was 1281akhs
of acres in 1891. This was 12·9 per cent of the gross area sown at the time.
In 1921, r the irrigated area had risen by 241akhs to 152 lakhs of acres. The
increase was faster than the increase in the gross area sown for the percentugc
was now 14' 7 against 12' 9 in 1 891.
In 1951, the irrigated area had further riscn by another 17 lakhs to 169
lakhs of acres. The increase in the irrigated area was a shade f~lster than the
in("Tease in the gross area sown and the percentage now stood at 15 . 1. When.
we divide the irrigated arca by the population and trace the changes in irrigated
area per capita, the result is as follows. The arcas under study had 16 cents
of irrigated hmd per capita in 1891. This rose to IS cents in 1931. It stands
at 14 cents in 1951.
The fllllowing table ~ho,vs the position in different zones :
TABLE 11

Irrigated areG per capita
(IN CENTS)

r-

North India districts
South India districts
West India districts .
Central India districts
ALL" DISTRICTS UNDEr? sTUDY.

•

~

1891

JrJ:! I

]951

19
19

25

I\)

14

7

16
8

2

2

2

16

IS

14

X

DECLINE OF CULTIVATION PER CAPITA

36. We may now sum up the results of our study of the selected districts
in which some 12 crores of the people of India live. The following l'Onclusions
arc established :

J- Just as there is a sharp contrast between the growth of population
during two thirty-year periods before and after the 1921 Census, there
is an equally sharp contrast in the relationship of this growth to the
growth of cultivation.

JI- This relationship may be expressed in three factors- thc 'arca of
cultivated land per capita', the 'double-crop area per capita' and the
'irrigated area per capica'. The contrast between the two thirty-year
periods consists in this,' Each of these three factors changed hut lillie
durillg the first thirty-year period. Each was a liule hi'glzer ill ]f):!1 {hall
ill 18.91. Duriug llle second I hirty-year period, however, every one (~r
these Three factors declined steadily and was substanTially lo'wer ill 19~jl
lhall in 1921.
111- The dwp bctwt:cn 1921 and J950 has been heaviest in respect' of
the area of cultivated land- it is not far short of one-quarter of the 1921
level. The double-crop area and the irrigated area increased somewhat
faster than the area of cultivated land, but very much less fast than the
increase of population. The aggregate l)f all three factors has als()
dropped heavily between 1<.)21 and 1950; tUld the drop is not very l~lr
short of three-quarters of the 1921 level.
IV-With Wlcsscntial variations, these features arc reproduced in every
divisiun. The drop is Jess heavy in the North-- nearer one-fifth than
one-fourth ; ~U1d is cOlTespoudingly heavier in the south and west. In
some parts of the Cowltry, the decline had started carlier than 1921the 1921 level of the per capita factors being even lower th~m in J 891.
But the steady decline of all the factors during three decades since J[J21

is an all-per7)asive fact.
37. In making this study we have had to restrict ourselves to one-third
of the popUlation mainly because it was necessary to cover two thirty-year
periods on a continuous and comparable basis. If we restrict ourselves only
to the second thirty-year period 192T-50, it is possible to provide reliable data
for a much larger territory.
It is wmccessary to recount all the n.:kvant figures which will be
The net result of ~h.:: comparison is set ~OUt
found in ApPENDIX I.

147

CHAPnR IV : :S!IOft Al(l>! SINCB I90,1

;a the 1IIlb.. beJb,w,. wJrieh. !hOW$ aU tJae tlhte:e jNr aapita· tigufes for ootb: 1921
anc 195.1,.. in I,' ~Il$" of 6 s.t.a1es Wnete 0vef :t~ etOJJeS of ~ople- hYe. ~
TABLE 12
(IN CENTS)

AIrlea oj cullJi..
valed land
per capita

[Jouble-c'/lOp

area
pIT capita

Irriga,ted area
per capiro
,---A-.....--.,

,----A..~

, -__...A..-_ ,

19:!!

195/

1!J21

J[J51

l[JZ1

195/

R
8

16

q

32

27

65

17
9

12

50mh Madras

'47
32.
56
44

R

Nonh Madras

197
44
7R

7

19

T7

Mysore

J05

70

4

5

16

13

18.'1

143
113
15 6

9

Il

2

3

33

33

12

20

2

2

2

72
53
55

1-1

J2

10

i

21

T7

Z_'i

I')

11)

25

:6

27
13

2J

Stale and division

M.a4r ••
Madra<; Deccan
Wcst Ma<kas

u

Madhya Pradesh.
Nort'h-W esli Madhya Pradesh
East .Miadhya. Pradt.'8h
South-West 1v1adhya. Pradesh

.

138
2Jl

Uttar Pra4esh
Hitn~llayall Uttar Prad(.'sh
East D.P. Plain

60
(,7

West U.P. Plain •
U.P. Hills & Plateau

~4
13 0

OS

IR

TT2

16

14
I'i
14

02

49

33

28

22

If:

121

99

25

18

37

40

10

10

·
Central U.P. Plain

72

'5

Punjab
Himalayan Puajab
Punjab Plain

Boa,bay
Bombay Deccan N()fthcrn

2~5

15 1

7

Bombay Deccan Southern
Bombay-Gufrat •
Eombay-Xcmkan .

243

180

141

114

2
7

5
4
4

68

48

3

2

6

7

5
2

4
T

It will be observed that Himalayan Uttar Pradesh (a small area with a quarter
crore of population) presents the only exception to the general rule and shows
a small increase in the area of cultivated land per capita. In every other

148

&ECL1NE OF CUl.TIVa\'l\lON ftR '~h

..tivisim, this faot~r 8S well as the QF~ «.all tJuee {actotli iJaow an
t1mBistakable decliae-:geneJ'ally of the orden- already Gated.

38. We have similar data for some other states also-.butmey are presented
seF>arately for the reason that tBe .acreage statistics of the major states among
them are of distinctly poorer quality than the states mentioned above.
figures are given below for what they,il'I'C worth

The

TAB1,E T3

(IN CENTS)

ZOhe and Stilte

Area oj
CUllivfJ,wd
'land per capita

Double-crop area
per capita

I rrigaled oIJUa
per capita

,-----"-~

r--~

,-----A.~

1.?:,) I

J!J:!l

1.951

1921

19.5]

7'

57

19

45

6

14
8

1 J 11

83

65

.'is

7
7

16
6
H

'4

51

9

~

13
13

49

30
71

5

2

27

10

.2

3

153
41

122

26

46

54

12

12

73

60

13

19,]J

&nit India
,Bihar.
West Bengal.
Orissa.
Assam.

II

I.')

'South Ilnaib

Travancore-C()chin
O1org .

87

I

'North-West India
Patiala & East Pb. States Union
Delhi •
Ajmer

16
3
7

10

3

22

15

It is obvious that these figures lend support to the inferences already drawn.
It should be empha.llised that the correctness of the conclu.<iions already reached
cannot be doubted, even if it should DC .possible -to show (and this might
be possible) that the figures of some df these states are significantly
in COl'rect .
39. We 'may conclude our study of this prt1foundly'imporrant phenomenon
'of'me "decline of cUltivation per capita' 'since 192'1 ·WIth -reference tc'Some facts
'which ·tend 'to show 'thiit this 'Phenomenon is' probably 'not oorffineH 'to

-India.
'149

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

-of Villagers. Transport in varied for-ms, haS develdped c6nspkilo~~. New
towns 'have 9prung 'up and old towns have greatly increased 'in m.tn.1beTs. Schools
have been increasing, literacy growing and the Iltimbcrs of 'people 'engaged in
many different professions seem to be everywhere increasing. The signs aie
also unmistakable of a quickening of the tempo of these Changes within the
last ten years- during and since World War II. One hears so '6ftetJ. of the
continued overcrowding of trains and bmes; cinemas and other places of
recreation are full to overflowing; and there is an ever-increasing demand for
admission to schools and colleges, with which existing institutions are unable to
cope.
43. All this, however, is far from being a complete answer to the question
we 'have posed. This question is essentially quantitative_ It is not sufficient
to say that gainful employment in industries and services has increased. It
is not even sufficient to say that the rate of growth of industries and services
'has not fallen short of the rate of growth of the population (assuming that 'this
snitement is true). What is required is such a change in the numbers as would
enable us to conclude that lhe development of industries and services has proceeded
fast enough to offset the decline of cultivat£on per capita during the 'last three

decades.
It is unfortunately not possible to clinch the answer to this qttestidtl otIe
way or the other conclusively by statistics. Our data relating to indnstries and
services are by no means comparable with the cultivation statistics set 'out in the
last section. They do not also go back far enough on a compartible basis.

44. At first sight it would seem that the census

data should suffice to
separate the growth of population in villages from the growth of population in
'towns and this might go a long way to answer the question. The relevant Hlfdrmation is given in the table below :
TABLE 15

GrOfl'lh
(IN LAKHS)

Pvpulmic11l
(IN l.AKHS)

CetlSus
year
192 1
193 1

1941 •
195 1

, -___. __ ....A---_ _ - _

ill 'Villages

2.199
2,420
2,7 10

2,95 0

152

r--------A.-.-~J

in rOW118 in tlillages

itl €Owns

Rale oj grofIJlh
during ehe'preceding
decade

r---..A--_._-._- __

in villages

in to_wns

282

334
43 H
61 9

• Actual figures of 1941 Census coun1.
til1d Puniab.

dUl'il,g (lie preccditlg
decade

+221
+29 0
--t-24°

+- 52

+10' I

+18'4

+1°4
+181

+12'0

--1-3'1 • I

8·9

+41.3

+

No allowance malic for inflation Of returns in West Bengal

C1tANGES IN TItE LIVELIHOOD PAT1'E~N

These figures show dearly. that the rate of growth in villages 1S loWer than In
towns- the difference being accounted for by migration from villages to
towns,
Among the towns themselves it seems, in general, likely that the cities 'and
major towns tend to grow more rapidly and the rate of growth shows clear 'signs
of acceleration, Thus, the ten largest cities added over half-a-crore to their
population during the decade immediately before the 1951 Census, The addition during the preceding decade (1931-40) had been less than one-third of
a crore, Even this was nearly twice as large as the addition which had laken
place during a period of 30 years preceding the 1931 Census. The figures for
these cities (on a town-group basis) are given below :
TABLE

r6

( I N LAKHS)

Town group

Additions to 'popu!at{cm dutillg
Population ,195/
1!141- 50
m:!1 40
1!JO 1--30

Greater Calcutta
Greater Bombay
Madras
Delhi
Hydcrabad

45' S
28'4

•

•

6'0

I I' 4

14 '2

6'4

3'9
1 '3

4't'j
J '4

J3'8
10'9

7'2

2'2

2'3

3'5

2'7

0'2

Ahmeuahad
Burtgalorc
'Kunpur
Poona
Lucknow

7'9
7'8
7' I
5'9

2'0

2'R

) '3

3'7

1'0

"S

2'2

2'4

0'4

2'4

0'8

0'9

I ' I

I '1

0'2

5'0

45, These figures are striking and they confirm the general impression

one forms by observation of city life of a greatly increased vdlume of non-agricultural avocations. They ate, however, misleading if accepted as an indication
of the 'change in the life of the people as a whole, For it will be noticed that the
-growth:ofrural,population during the last three decades though smaller than that
of towns is 'nevertheless quite large, There is little doubt that the rate of growth
of rnral population -has substantially out-stripped the rate of progress of cultivation. Has there been a -growth of rural 'industries and services on a scale sufficient to offset this difference - or indeed to any extent at all? It seems very
'. According to census data the growth of population in Greater Calcutta WIis 14, 6 Lakhs during the
1931-40'and 10'4 rakhs d\tting 1941-50, They have not been shown separately against Greater Culcutta
because it ill known thatthere was over-enumeration and consequent inflation ofthe 1941 Census figure.

IS3

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

unlikely, though we cannot support a definitive answer conclusively by
statistics .
46. Even though a conclusive answer may not be furnished it is necessary
that available data should be examined with full comprehension of the difficulty
in drawing inferences from them and such indications as they provide should
be noted.
The economic data yielded by the Censuses of 193I and 1951 have been
analysed in order to set up such comparisons as appear reasonably possible and
valid. There are difficulties arising out of small but significant changes in
definitions and classifications. There are also other difficulties necessarily
inherent in any such enquiries carried out on a mass scale over a sub-continent.
A full account of these matters will be found in the paper.1j printed as ApPENDIX
III. The conclusions recorded at the end of this paper are reproduced below:
I-During the twenty years following 193 I, population grew faster
than cultivation. The area of cultivated land per capira is known
to have declined significantly in Unar Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa, Assam,
Madras, Iviysore, Travancore-Cochin, Bombay, Madhya Pradesh
and Punjab. There is little doubt, that if correct figures of cultivation had been available for other states a similar decline would
have been observed in all of them.
II-Notwithstanding such decline in the area of cultivated land per'
capita, the relative weight of dependence on agriculture for gainful
employment has not declined in the country as a whole. It is
probable that it has increased slightly. Such increase is observable
in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa, Assam, Madras, Hyderabad,
Rajasthan and Punjab. Dependence on agriculture has not changed
in Madhya Pradesh. It has probably diminished in Bombay, West
Bengal and Mysore.
III-The main reaction to this general decline in the area of cultivated
land per capita, unaccompanied by a more than proportionate
increase in non-agricultural employment, has been a general lncrease
of non-earning dependency. The increase in absolute numbers of
non-earning dependants has exceeded the entire increase of rural
population in India, as well as in each of five zones out of six.
The percentage of non-earning dependants to the general
population has increased in every major state except Bombay, West
Bengal and Punjab. It has decreased slightly in Bombay and West
Bengal; and is practically unchanged in Punjab.

IS4

CitANGES IN THE LIVEUHOOt> PATT£RN

The increases in the percentages arc not accompanied by any
material change in sex ratio or age structure. They must, therefore,
be regarded as a rough index of the growth of unemployment in
different parts of the country.

IV- There has been a general increase throughout the country in the
number of cultivators and cultivating labourers (inc1uding unpaid
family helpers) working on the same area of cultivated land- say
100 acres. The increases are relatively small in the following
states: Assam (46 to 48), Bihar (50 to 52), Uttar Pradesh (49 to
51), Madras (34 10 36) and Orissa (29 to 32).
Larger increases are observed in the following states :
Punjab (23 to 26), Bombay (17 to 23), Madhya Pradesh (26 to
33) and Travancore-Cochin (4 1 to 57).
Among the major states for which figures are available,
Mysore alone shows a fall in this number (32 to 26).
The figures of increase in the number of workers provide
rough indication that under-emp~oyment is growing on the land,
but the picture is somewhat blurred by uncertainty about the role
of unpaid family helpers in the cultivation of land.

V-

Material changes have occurred in the percentage of cultivating
labourers to all workers in land (i. e., cultivating labourers and
cultivators including their unpaid family helpers). There is only
one major state where this percentage has increased- TravancorcCochin (34 to 47). Th~ percentage has remained practically
unchanged in Bihar (27-26), Mysore (13-14), Hyderabad (31) and
Punjab (11-12).

In other states the percentage has fallen: Uttar Pradesh
(18 to 9), Orissa (30 to 19), West Bengal (40 to 28) Madras (3 8
to 35), Bombay (43 to 18), Madhya Pradesh (43 to 32) and Rajasthan
(II to 4).
The fall in the percentage of cultivating labourers is the
natural result of increase in the number of cultivators and members
of their families occupying the same area of cultivated land. The
cultivators' need for employing labourers diminishes, as also their
capacity to pay for their services ..

It is clear, however, that this is not the sole cause of the fall
in the proportion of cultivating labourers. There are reasons to

ISS

CHAPtER rv: BEFORE AND SINCE ~t

~eve t:hat in v~ 'l'orts

« trIte 'ooUlIlry, tbere were consider-

;able 'number 'of :people wl!o were in fact 'CDttWat01"8 ,but not acknowledged as sach 1ft:oMeT 'to .guard. against the ,accrna1 1()f occupancy
rights in land. There were !probably also 'other ~le who partook
of the characteristics of both cultivators and cultivating labourers and
whose Classification was open to geittline 30ubt. As "a result of the
operation of tenancy legislation '(old and "new) as' Wen 'as the general
change in the social climate, it is likely that a 'convetsiort' has taken
place between 1931 and 195'1 of many such people 'from the status of
cultivating labourers to cultivators. Such 'conversion' probably
accounts for an important part of the fall in the proportion of cultivating'labottrers observed ifi Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh,
RajasdiatJ. and possibly also -elsewhere. While there is little doubt
about the fact that the propdttion ofcriltivat1ng 1abom'ers has fallen
and the fall is explainable ,by me 1\IV0 reasOlJS mentioned above,
there are ~l1ng 'val'istidns in 'the -nature 'of 'the changes which
,have taken ·place in -different states.

VI- There is 'a 'Complex inter"'relatioilShip betWeen.othe nature and magnitude10f chtltlg~ df the followlng'desCriptioo 'ERn of which occurred
betWeen 1931 'and 1951)- the intensity 'of Ithe 'decline;6f the area of
cultivated land per capikl; the rate of urbanization and the rate of
growth of non-agricultural avocations ; the actual ext.ent to which
un-employment has increased and been ;reflected in ,the percentage
of non-earning dependency ; the actual extent to which underemployment has increased and been reflected in the number of
workers on unit area ofcriltivated,land ; 'and finally the nature and
extent of change, if any) in the participation of unpaid family
helpers in cultivation operations. Much more detailed study and
'many 10dil ~tfquit'ies '~te 't1eeessa'ty befme this inter-relationship
eIDl be utfta"ell~d'edm:pletely.
VII- Among cultivators the relative proportion of ·those who may be
called owner-cultivators because they .possess permanent and
'heritable -ocetip::mcy tights -in 'latttl 'must htlve increased to some
extent 'between '1931 'atfd '1951. it is not, 'hC5Wever, possible to
instinite a corn{)arison in this respect 'because
"noh-comparable
c1assificatiotl at the 'tWo c~nStJses.

of

VIII- Agricultural rentiers formed only a small proportion of the people
.
in 1931 and'this proportion lha~ 'become still similler in 1951.
IC;6

D _- Growth ~f Food Shortage
AN BXTJU,ORD.IlIoI'ARY development has taken place within the Jast 10 years,
which very few people would have regarded as a likely occurrence before 194I.
This d.cvelo.pment is generally referred to as 'food controls'. That is a poor
and somewhat misleading description of the reality- which consists primarily
of a gigantic state trading system) set up by the Central Government and all the
State Governments functioning in co-operation with ('Inc another. What arc
called 'controls' are the legal restrictions on traders, producers and cons.umers
of food~ns which enable this state trading system to function.

The operations of this system <,luring the three calendar years 1949, 1950
and 1951 may be summed up in a few simple figures. On an average, 43' 0
lakhs of tons were purchased every year in different states within the country
-_. mostly from farmers directly; in some places from traders. Another 34' 8
lakhs of tons were purchased every year from various foreign countries of the
world. These enormous quantities of food were moved over great distances,
stored and distributed. The purchases :md distributions were carried out in
accordance with an overall basic plan framed once every year for the country
as a who,4! by the Centnd Government; and, within the fralllcwor~ of this plan,
of detailed plans for each state, framed by the St..te Government conccrn<;d.
These plans were not designed to make commercial profits. They were
dcsi~ed primarily to meet the daily needs of crores of people all the year round;
to safegw,trd severa] other cfores of people against the serious consequences of
e~~essive rise of prices or interruptions of supply in private trade.
So long as
aggregate slJPplics arc smaller thAn the quantities needed, the plans were
design,eq to spref}d the national shortage over as large a number as possible and
insure them against the risk of death by starvation. The average annual issues
thlJ.S made from stocks of government grain to ration shops, fair price shops,
relief ql.\Ota shops and variow; other controlled distribution ag~ncics amo\Wteq
to 77' I lakb$ of tons.
Accotc:ij~g to r~ports (which relate to a short period immediately before
3lst ~r<:h, 1951), the total number of people who received suppJies issqcd
frQIll Govenun~t stocks numbered 12 crores and 66 lakhs. Not a)J of them
were supplied coatinUQusly all the year rOWld. At least one third of th,is tot~l
must have been so supplied- possibly more. The others were supplied with
grain during those months of the year when they were most in need and when
private trade could be least relied upon to provide regular supplies at fair prices.
TABLE 17 on next page shows the number of consumers of supplies made available by this nation-wide 'state trading system'.
I~1

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

TABLE 17
(I N LA KHS)

Rural
Urban
population population
Statutory rationing
Non-statutory rationing
Relief quota shops and fair price shops
Other agencies of controlled distribution
TOTAL

444

We should realise that this system literally forced itself on the country.
The Government never wanted to carry the rc&ponsibility. They have made
more than one effort to rid themselves of it, but wiihout success. Why did
this happen? We should try to understand the development in the perspective
of hi&tory.
48. The establishment and development of a free market throughout India
and its linkage with the world market was perhaps the mo~t important among
the economic changes brought about under British rule sometime in the
middle of the last century. The reform was visibly beneficial) in that it gave
a great fillip to the development of cultivation. A brisk foreign trade grew up.
Notwithstanding this general prosperity, parts of the country were ravaged by
famine and some classes of the people- especially those who were losing their
livelihood in the new frec market- suffered grievously. Therefore,tht. Government of those days took effective steps energetically in order to combat the
famine5, to relieve suffering and to save life. What was the right thing to do
in order to achieve these purposes, without creating avoidabJc wastes and abuses)
was not easy to settle off-hand- it had to be discovered by tnal and enor. One
of the most contentiom and perplexing issues in this process of trial and error
had been whether or not steps should be taken by Government to contro] the
price of grain and arrange its distribution. The conclusion finally reached was
recorded by the Famine Commission of 1880 in the following terms :
"We have no doubt that the true principle for the Government to adopt as its
general rule of conduct in this matter is to leave the business of the supply and
distribution of food to private trade, taking care that every possible facility is given for
its free action, and that all obstacles matel ial or fiscal are, as far as practicable, removed.
The manner in which the demand for grain in South India in 1877 was met by supplies
sent from the North showed the promptitude witn which IndilUl trade will oper~te

l58

(!ROWTH OF FOOD SHORTAGE

when the facilities for transport and the profit expected are adequate .......... It is only
reasonable to anticipate that with every year's additional experience of the use to be
made of the railways and the tdegraphs, the activity and sensitiveness ofIndian trade
will continue to grow, and that with the new stimulus thus imparted to it, and the
gradual extension of rail ways into districts where they do not yet exist, the power of
meeting the wants of the population, in time of local scarcity, will be still further
developed. Every interference by the Government with the operations of trade
must be auverse to this tendency, and prejudicial to those habits of sdf-rcliance
Which it is so esscnti.al for Government to encourage".

This policy was consistently followed. In the short run, it was not conspicuously successful. Thus it failed during the last decade of the last century
when millions died of famine, while export of grain was going on. The failure
must be attributed to the fact that the basic assumption underlying the poJicythe presence of an overall surplus even in the worst famine years- was not
yet a/act. But it was tending to became a fact. With every year that passed
thereafter, the policy turned out to be so uniformly successful that it got established as an axiom of public administration. for a brief space of a few months
(shortly aftcr the end of World War I) the axiom was called in question; prices
and mov~ments of rice had to be controlled. But the spasm passed. Every
thing was normal again. A generation grew up which took it for granted that
interference by G·ovcrnmcnt in any shape or form, with the activities of tradeps
was unthinkable. The vitality of this belief wus such that it survived the world
economic depression of the thirties. A fantastic filII of grain prices was occurring. All over the country, crorcs of farmers were reeling Wlder the blow,
sujfering unjust losses and getting loaded with debts. Bankruptcies were
multiplying. It was realised that the country and the world were passing
through an extraordinary crisis. It was necessary to do something especially to
relieve the fllrll1Crs. So, arrangements were made to suspend or remit land
revenue and rents. Governments went even so far as to scale down debtsat first by conciliation and later by statutory compulsion. But that anything
sh{)uld be done directly to adjust the market supply of grain to the market demand
and fix and hold a fair price- the idea was not even seriously considered.
49. The change came about all of a sudden, shortly after Japan entered
World War II and her forces occupied most of the countries of South-East
Asia. Emma fell, and the imports of rice from that country were cut-off. The
reaction in all the grain markets of India was immediate, violent and prolonged.
Supplies disappeared and reappeared in smaIl quantities fitfully. Prices
shot up inexplicably. This could not go on for any length of time without
putting the lives of masses of people in jeopardy. Bankruptcy is one thingdeath is another. The Governments had, perforce, to interfere. But they
159

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 192]

found &OOn enough, that a simple order addressed to the trade to the effect
that a pric\! specified in tl;te ord,cr should not be exceeded, meant nothing, at
all. It merely meant that law-abiding traders should quit business- leaving
the tracle eudrely in the hands of hardened speculators. The consumer was
worse off than before. Experience clearly showed that it was not a question of
wickedness of individuals- it was the system which could no longer function.
The vast mass of traders- the retailers- were ready and willing to carry out
distribution according to the needs of the people within the limits of prices
fixed by Governments, but only if they could be assured by Government that
they could get regular supplies at corresponding prices. This meant Government going into the wholesale trade in a big way, superseding a relatively
small nwnber of the larger wholesale dealers (to whom speculation offered
too great a temptatioR to resist), converting the smaller wholesale dealers into
its own agents) and (most important of alJ) assuring itself ()f fcgul2r supplies
from farmers by the exercise of statutory powers. No one had planned in
advance that these were the right steps to take. It took time to find out, by a
process of trial and error. But it did not take very long in those part5 of tbe
country where the Provincial or State Government had a clear perception of the
objective to be secured and a firm determination to secure it.
There was some delay and indecision in Bengal, and this coincided with a
crop-failure (not, in itself, of a very exceptional character). The result was a
tragic repetition of the famines of the last century- IS lakhs of people died of
hWlger and the diseases attending famine, all within a few months. The
tragedy gave a sharp jolt to the minds of the people and made them realise that
Wlles~ there wa~ enough t(){~dgrains to spare after meeting the needs of evcrybudy,
free trade caIUlot fWlction. It was necessary that controlled behaviour should
be imposed by Government on all concerned. It was especially necessary that
thos~ producers to whom food was not a problem, should part with their surplus
of grain in due time at a fixed price. So long as the people J<::alised this and
co-operated with the efforts of Government, the system workeq well; and,
though crop failures occurred in South India in 1946 (which were much more
serious than that which touched off tragedy in I943)~ the distribution of supplies
was kept going and 00 lives were lost.

50. After the war ended, people waited patiently enough for a couple of
years hoping that all these necessary though irksome inn.ovations would dis~pcar
and they would once again be free to buy and sell foodgrains as they pleaseci
and when t}ley pleased. This nqstalgia for the retum of free trade was a fa<-t.
It pervaqed all parts of the cOlUltry and all Governments had to rtckon with it.

160

GROWTH OF FOOD SHORTAGE

Mingled with this genuine feeling, there was no doubt also the knowledge,
8DlQng quite considerable number of people that if the restrictions were removed
they could make large profits in a short time. One of the unfortunate developments, during and since World War II, has been an acquired taste for getting
rich quickly.

A committee appointed by Government went into this question and recommended, by a majority, that the controls should be lifted. A minority warned
against the step and argued that the time was not yet ripe. The Government
acted on the advice of the majority. Within a few months, the experience of
1942 was repeated; and the minority was proved right. Government quidcly
retraced their steps, lest the situation might drift towards a repetition of the
experience of I943.

51. It is now very ne"arly five 'years since foodgrain controls were lifted and
then re-imposed_ Every one has been hoping each year that the next year
would see the end of these controls, but this has not yet happened. People
have also been hoping that the need for importing foodgrains would also disappear and that this would release resources for importing machinery needed
for industrialising the country. But this has also failed to happen. On the other
hand, Government fmmd themselves compelled to import unprecedentedly
large quantities of food-grains instead. The relatively easier conditions treated
by these imports, coinciding with good season for crops is once again having
their effect. The mind of the people has been drifting towards de-control and
stoppage of imports- in very much the same way as in the closing months of
1947. But the Planning Commission has given warning that controls will have
to be kept on and imports will have to be secured; and though the Commission
hopes that the implementation of the Plan wlll lead to an end of both in a shon
time, it is not prepared to bind itself to a date and it advises caution and
preparedness to continue with controls and imports as long as nece~sary.

52. There is, today, a widespread sense of perplexity- a feeling that the
present situation is unintelligible; and, in consequence, a big question mark
over the future. There are many questions to which firm answers appear to be
unavailable. How much food do we need ? How much more food do we
need as the population is added to each year? How much food are we producing? No doubt this changes from one year to another because of the seasons;
but what (on an average of good, bad and indifferent seasons) are we in fact
producing? Is this really less than what we need,? If so, bow much less ?
Is it really impossible to do with that much less ? ,Must we import? If so,
how much? At what rate has this avmge production of food been increasing
161

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

in the past? At what rate can we expect it normally to increase in the future- ?
To what extent can the various development schemes which are included in the
First Five Year plan rdise the level of average production? Can we or can we not
manage without imports? If we can, when ? Until then; how much should
we import? Can we afford to pay for these imports? All these are relevant
questions. Most people (probably all whose interest in public affairs is
sufficient to induce them to read newspapers regularly) have no doubt
put these questions to themselves. Jt is doubtful whether anyone is quite
sure in his mind that he has got the right answer to even half the number of
questions. The fact is- and we must face it- there are no demonstrably
certain answers to these questions. It is true that all the questions raise matters
of apparently sjmple fact, which can be cleared up if statistics are available.
But the statistical system of the country has not been designed to answer these
questions with certwnty. It has not been so designed- because these qucstiCllS
did not require to be answered until about the time when Japan entered World

War II.
And yet there is great need for answers which (even if not certain) would
carry conviction as probably correct. Experience shows that the peopk are not
unready to 8ccept reasonable restraints designed for the ccm.mcn geed or to maKe
present sacrifices in order to secure the welfare of the next generation. But
they will not do this if they lack conviction of necessity. This conviction is
seldom acquired by ratiocination. It is gained by the mass of the people largely
by guidance from the leaders of public opinion. And the leaders cannot succeed
in imparting conviction unless they possess it themselves.
I t is the purpose of this section and the rest of this report to make such a
contribution to the c1arifiUlticn of these important questions as a careful study of
available data may render possible.
53. We can be fairly definite about the time when undivided India· changed
over from being a net exporter of foodgrains into a net importer of foodgrains.
As it happens, this too was round about 1921. We shall proceed to review
the evidence on this point- before and since I921.
There is a remarkable passage in the report of the Famine Comm~ssion of
1880 which refers to certain figures as indicating that "the ordinary outturn of
food in British India exceeds 50 million tons, and the ordinary surplus available
for storage, for export, or for th€ luxurious consumption of the richer classes is
more than 5 million tons". The Commission proceeds then to discuss the
'------

*The old statistics of India related to India within present limits, plus Pakistan plus Bunna. Separation
of the figures relating to tht:se areas presents a difficult problem. Burma figures have been separated. Thereference to 'undivided India' means India plus Pakistan.

16~

GROWTH OIl' FOOD SHORTAGt

probable shortage likely to be caused in the production of the larg~t area which
- on the basis of previous experience- might be expected to be affected by
famine, and whether. or not there would be sufficient stocks available within the
country to meet the shortage thus caused. The probable shortage of the area
affected by the worst famine, deemed to be likely, was assumed as 3 million tons.
Three sources of supply were designated as available to meet the shortage.
"First, the local stocks of the distressed area which taken at three months' supply
of the people's food,amounts to 2 3 / 4 millions; second, thelyear's surplus of the
districts not affected which would be 3 I/:a millions but might be expected to be
larger in consequence of the diminished consumption; and third, the local stocks
in these districts. " The Commission found no difficulty in reaching the
conclusion that "these three sources of supply, taken together, would appear to
be quite sufficient to provide what was required".
Two members of the Commission dissented from this conclusion. They
said "We are unable to place confidence on the table which shows an estimated
annual surplus yield of five million tons of foodgrains. The average annual

export of rice and grain from all India is one million tons, which should thus leave
four million tons to be laid by, a quantity sufficient to feed 24 millions of poople.
As famines come but once in 12 years, there should in that period be an accumulated surplus sufficient to feed nearly 300 millions. And yet when famine
does come, and then affecting at its worst not more than a tenth of that
number, it is only by immense pressure on other parts of India, and at a quadrupled price, that the barest sufficiency of supplies can be obtained. This
seems a clear proof that the alleged surplus must be gready overestimated. "
This echo from the past is not very unlike a good deal of statistical controversy to which the public has become accustomed during the last ten years.
The point to be noted in these exchanges is not as to who was right (the minority,
as usual, seems to have been right); but what emerges as undisputed common
ground. Both sides agree that India was then normally surplus in foodgrains.
The dispute was about whether or not, in the worst famine year, the stocks available would physically exceed the requirements of consumption. At any rate, we
know that India was then normally surplus in foodgrains.
54. Elsewhere in the report we have details about the size of this surplus
The Commission explains how and why the value of India's exports was substantially in excess of imports. "For the last ten years, the excess of exports
has averaged about 16 million sterling ofwruch perhaps halfmay be regarded as
the return on capital invested in railways and commercial enterprises and h!lf
as the charge on account of the administration of India by England which has to
be met in:.England."

CHAP'tER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

The principal exports are almost entirely the raw produce of agriculture
and animal husbandry. They include foodgrains valued at 9 million sterling
(or almost exactly the return on capital invested in railways and commercial
enterprises). The quantity "touched its highest point in 1876-7, when it
reached 26,210,000 cwt., and had fallen to 22,887,000 cwt., in 1878-9". The
figures indicate an average of about 12 lakhs of tons per annum as the level of
foodgrain exports at the time. The two chief items were rice and wheat and
the destinations were Europe, Mauritius, the Cape, other colonies, Arabia
and Persia. Thus, we start with the firm knowledge that in or about 1880,

India was normally surplus in joodgrai'ns, i'ncluding both rice and wheat, and
the surplus was of the order of 12 lakhs of tons per annum.

55. Then we have good evidence of what was happening during the last
decade of the nineteenth century and the first decade of the present century.
The relevant statistics were assemb1ed and sifted and the figures relating to
Burma separated by a Special Officer (Shri K. L. DATTA) appointed by the
Government of India in 1910. The figures for undivided India, averaged for
five-year periods, are as follows :
TABLE 18

(IN LAKHS OF TONS)

Five·year period
1890-91 to 1894-95
1895-96 to 1899- 1 900
1900-01 to 1904-05
1905-06 to 1909-10

Exports

Imports

Net
Exports

14'5

2'1
4'8
6'2
9·6

12'4
6·2
10'4
5'2

II ·0

16·6
14.8

The first half of the famine decade shows the level of net exports to be much
the same or as a little above the level reached some 15 ye~ earlier, and described
by the Famine Commission of 1880. The second half shows a sharp drop
doubtless reflecting the crop failures which led to famine. [But it is significant
that exports were taking place even then- though millions were dying in many
parts of the country for want of food. We noted this already in our review of
policy in relation to freedom of trade.] Then there is a recovery during the
first five years of this century followed by a drop. The decade as a whole shows
a small decline of about 3 lakbs in ten years- which may not be specially
164

cttownt OF FOOD SHottTAGit

significant. But the trend shown in the table below was undOUbtedly quite
significant:
TABLE 19
(IN LAKHS OF TONS)

Net

Five-year period
1890--91 to r894M95
1895-96 to 1899~1900
1900-01 to 1904-05
1905-06 to 1909-10

exports
Ner
out of
exports
our of
undivided
India and undivided
Burma
India

Net
exports
out of
Burma

25'5

12'4

13'0

21 '4
31 '6
28'4

6'2.
10'4
5'2.

15'2.
2.1 '2
23'2.

There is no mistaking the rising tempo of exports of food grains from Burma.
British rule was established in Burma later than in India. Suppression of
civil disorder, settlement of title to land on durable and secure tenures, development of transportation, creation of a free market and its Hnkage with a free world
market- these were the measures which had already started the development of
agricultural production and the canalisation of the resultant surplus into the
growing world market. What had already occurred in undivided India was now
occurring in Burma after a time lag of a few decades.
In undivided India, the
effects of development were beginning to wear-off; and one may, in retrospect,
already note signs of the steep diminution of exports of foodgrains which was
to follow_ In Burma, on the other hand, there was still very considerable scope
for profitable development of agricultural production; net exports of foodgrains
were, therefore, still rising. The policy of non-interference with private trade in
grain (even if famine raged in parts of the country)- the doctrine of the
Famine Commission of 1880- worked successfully for nearly forty years,
because India, Pakistan and Burma formed a single trading unit and this
combined unit had a large and growing exportable surplus of grain. A physical
shortage of supply over the entire rerrirory of India, Pakistan and Burma was
out of the question; and the development of modem transportation by fail and
steamship assured the availability of commercial supplies in all parls of this
.
territory at all times as required.

,6. From about the period of World War I, separate statistics for India
have been worked out by the Directorate of Economics and 'Statistics of the

165

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE AND SINCE :t~~ ~

Ministry of Food and Agriculture. They tell us what· happened during a
~ uccession of five five-year periods ending with the outbreak of World War II.
During the first of these periods i.e., 1915-16 to 1919-20, undivided India was
~ till functioning as a net exporter. Exports were 15 • 9 lakhs tons and imports

were II'9 Jakhs of tons. Net exports were 4'0 lakhs of tons which is smaller
than the last figure we saw for the period 1905-06 to 1909-10. It is signi1icant
that in spite of all the inducements and pressures which must have stimulated
exports during war-time, the figure was smaller than 10 years earlier. This
helps us to understand why it turned out to be the last five-year period when
undivided India was a net exporter of foodgrains, Thereafter, there was a net
mport dur:ng every five-year period as shown by the table below:
TABLE 20
(IN LAKHS OF TONS)

Five-year period
1920-21 to 1924-25
1925-26 to 1929-30
1930 -3 1 to 1934-35
I935-36 to 1939'-40

Imports

Exports

Net
Imports

11'4

9'8

1'6

15'9

8'3

7'6

18'4
20'7

S'7

12'7
13'8

6'9

There can be no mistake about the meaning of these figures*. They show a
consistent trend of increase in average annual imports of foodgrains (mainly
rice) and an almost equally consistent decrease in the expon of foodgrains
(mainly wheat). Net exports had ended. Net imports were increasing rap:dly
in undivided India, At the same time, however, the development of Burmese
agriculture was still proceeding, The average level of net exports out of
Burma had risen from 23·2 lakhs of tons per annum during 1905-06 to 1909"'10
to 30' 6 lakhs of tons per annum during the quinquennium preceding World
War II,
, 57. The subsequent changes during and since World War II may be briefly
told, During 1940-41 and 1941-42 net imports diminished to 9'6 lakhs and
4' 3 lakhs. During 1942-43 imports were cut off and India supplied Ceylon and
a few other places; net exports reappeared for about one year though the quantity
was small- only 2' 9 lakhs. The Bengal Famine occurred during 1943-44
• The figures relate to India sl)d Pakistan jointly We are not perbsps likely to be far wrong if Wt
idcnlificd the 'imports' and 'cxports' figures (or the quinquennium 1935'36 to 1939-40 S8 the net import
requirement and net export capacity of India and Pakistan respectively, on the eve of World War,lI,

166

EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF FOODGRAINS IN INDIA
(1890-91 TO 195Z)
INDEX
~PORTS ____ ~

TONS IN
THOUSANDS

IMPORTS _____ •

3,OOO~-------------------------~--------------~----------'---------'~--

INDIA - CUM- PAKISTAN

1,0

TO

1952.

1,500

I

If)

:J

i 1,000
a:

tf):::l

.... cn
a: ...

r\.

.. __._._-

'\ /'

OUI

D..Z
~

--. -

""'r--~FLINE

0

en ....
1-a:u

.l

I

I

INDIA

I NOJ A- CUM-PAKISTAN

OF

.......

- --

1,000

..

-----_._ ---_ .._. .. _

~ ""-

Q.u.

x Ul

111°.... 2,000

I

:z

I

I

3,000
3,500

'WINTED BY THE MANA&II. GOVERNMENT 0' INDIA ,HOTD LITHO PII ••• HE_ PEL"I .

•

--.--------- _.._------_.. -._- -- ---------_

SUF Fie IENCY

0-

UJ

.-

:---

~ r---..

V

/

\
\,

, (;:aoW11t OF FOOl> SitoRtAGI
when'India received, under international allocations, a net supply of 3' 0 lakhs.
The next two years were managed with only 7' 3 and 9· 3 lakhs of tons. The
shortage was made good mainly by eating into the carry-over; the stocks
normally carried hy farmers, traders and consumers were reduced, thus adding
greatly to the difficulties of distribution. and creating the risks of break-down
which was the nightmare of 1946. The first full post-war year (1946-47)
saw India importing 25' 8 lakhs and the next year (1947-48),26 ·61akhs. At that
stage, the agitation against state trading commenced. These imports seemed to
be both enormous and unnecessary; hence the demand for stoppage of imports
and lifting of controls. This did not, however, work. During 1948-49, the first
full year after partition, India imported 30' 5 lakhs. Then it was reduced to
28' 6 and 27' 2 lakhs. This was followed by two successive years of very large
imports. The Report of the Planning Commission mentions 32'71akhs as the
average level of imports during 1947-52.

58. 32'7 lakhs of tons may seem, at first sight, to be a large figure
for imp 0 r tat ion every year. But it would not surprise anyone
who was familiar with the trend of changes in popUlation and cultivation
as well as of imports and exports of foodgrains and who had appreciated
the significance of the figures in TABLE 20. Indeed, as we shall see later,
the real occasion for surprise and perplexity is that the level of average imports
rose so slowly and is still so low, when compared with the rapidity of decline of
cultivation per capita.
One other comment which should be made at this stage is the fact that the
composition of the imports had changed greatly; there was very little rice and
a great deal of wheat and coarse grains. Before World War II, it will be
recalled, India was importing rice heavily, but still exporting wheat. The
change of composition became necessary because the grain was procured mostly
from new sources of supply. It is necessary to note what happened to Burma
whose steadily increasing exports of rice were the main source of supply of
steadily increasing imports into India. During the war, of course, Burma
exported no rice to India. After the war ended, a trickle of exports re-started.
On an average of three years 1948-so it has risen only to 12' I lakhs, which was
lower than the level reached over sb{ty years ago ; and less than two-fifths of the
level reached just before World War.II. As it is obvious that the population
of Burma could not have grown during these 10 or 12 years to the point at which
its export surplus could be so largely eaten up, it is evident that cultivation must
have diminished, or the marketing of the surplus' is being held up or both
must have happened. The disturbed conditions which have, no doubt,
contributed to these results may be overcome at a not too distant date. But would
167

crum~

IV: BEFORE AND SINCE 1921

exports from Burma ever again reach the pre-war level ? Or may it be that
it would reach only a lower level and then Burma would repeat the history of
India with a declining level of exports ?
59. Did the rapid growth of net imports after 1921 owe its origin to the
decline of cultivation per capita, or could it be that it was due to a shift of cultivation away from foodgrains to other crops. There was indeed a decline in
the percentage of area sown to foodgrains to the total sown area under all crops.
The figures for the districts whose statistics were specially compiled and set
outinthelastsectionwere8o'7percentinr891, 71'8percent in 1921 and 77'2
per cent in 195I. The difference between 1921 and 1951 is hardly significant.

The main increases in imports, which took place during the last three decades,
cannot therefore be attributed to the shift in cultivation away from joodgrains.
This is an important fact.
Whi~e this is true of India as a whole, the shift is somewhat more clearly
marked in particular areas. This is seen from the table below:
TABLE 21

Percentage of area under foodcrops to total area sown
N atuTal division
Bombay Deccan Northern (part)
Bombay Deccan Southern
Bombay-Konkan (part) ,
Mys! rc
North-West Madhya Pradesh,
South-West Madhya Pradesh,
Madras Deccan
West Madras
South Madras (part)
East UoPo Plain
Central U,Po Plain
West U,P. Plain (part)
UoPo Hills & Plateau (part)

1891

1921

1951

81'J
77°3
92°6
85'4
80°2

74°3
68 °7
75'9
82'S
77° 8

73°4
70°4
72°1
76 °1
81 °7

53'7
72 °6
64'8
78'2
91 '8

58°4
66'4
59° 6
74'7
90°3

91 °6
81 °3
86'1

90°2
81 °4
92 °I

·
·
·
·
57'7
· 76
· 71'4'8
·
· 84'0
88°2

·

· 90'4
·· 8280 °4°3

These figures show (i) that the shifts away from foodgrains to other crops
(presumably oilseeds and cotton) were more significant before 1921 than later;
(ii) they were more significant in South India and West India than elsewhere;
and (iii) that shifts in the opposite direction also occurred, these being signifkant in North Indi~ and Central India.
168

GRoWTii OF FOOb sito1d'Ael
60. The period of several years during which India was forced to manage.
without adequate imports of grains witnessed an increase of grain prices of
an altogether Wlprecedented character. When it took place, there WhS no
question of its being dictated by economic necessity. There was a shonage of
foodgrains; and people must eat or starve to death. Under conditions of free
trade, those who held grain could, by the simple plOcess of declining to sell it
for a time, raise the price to almost any height. An.d they did so, repeatedly.
The first wave of increase took place in this manner until the Governments
scepped in, and by lheir intervention froze the prices at whatever levels
had been reached in different pans of the country on various dates
in the second half-year of 1942 and the first half-year of 1943. In
Bengal, the freezing came later. As a result noc of price control
orders but of the operation of the state trading system, the price
of foodgrains was held for sometime at a stable level. But the consequences of the original rise were working themselves our. The pIices of
other foodstuffs and agricultural produce went up because the price of grain
had gone up. The cost of food having gone up, wages had to be raised
or supplemented by dearness al1owances. The price of other commodities
went up because wages and dearness allowances increased the cost of
production. When the wheel had thus come full circle, the farmers complained
that other prices had risen against them while the price of grain was held
down by Government control. They also complained about the arbitrary
differences between grain prices allowed to farmers in different parts of the
country which had only a historical (and no economic; justification. Compkints
of this nature helped to ~well the general chorus of discontent which led
to de-control early in 1948. A second wave of rise in prices followed.

Re-control froze the grain prices at the higher levels reached by the second

wave. The repercussioxu, of these higher prices of grains were reinforced
by the effects of the Korean War. The struggle of the Governments against
the persistent tendency of prices to rise still continues. The tap-root of
this continued pressure still remains- the fundamental disparity between
the demand for and supply of foodgrains, and the fact that the consumer
cannot stand out against a rise in grain prices in the same way in which
he can stand out against a rise in prices of almost any other commodity or
service. History provides no more vivid demonstration of the crucial role
of grain prices in the life of the people.
61. It so happens that the longest continuous record of carefully ascertained
prices is available with the Madras Government. From this record a chan has
been prepared which shows the trend of South Indian paddy prices over a periOd

169

ciiAPtER IV: BEFORE ANi> SINcE 192i
of ISO years. The chart will repay careful study. For the first" fifty years one
can see a level course ; the price bobs up and down, but the fluctuations are
relatively small. Then for another fifty years one can see that the line- above
and below which fluctuations take place- is n0 longer level. Each decade is. a
little higher than the preceding one. At the same time, the fluctuations tend to
be sharper. We get peaks arising suddenly; they are the famine years. This
part of the diagram shows the trend of India's free market, firmly linked to a
growing world market. And then the last fifty years-with the first big peak
marking out World War I, then a valley marking the world economic depression
and, finally, the tallest of all peaks on which we stand today.
62. On the top left -hand comer, in the same cNtrt, there is an inset diagram
which is also well worth study. It shows the comparison between the course of
wheat prices in the United States of America (marked by a black line) and South
Indian paddy prices (marked by a red line)- both being reduced to a common
index with the years 1925 -26 to 1929-30 as the base period. It is a convenient
base- for, it marks the level from which grain prices plunged downwards and
caused great hardship among farmers. Until a few years before World War I,
wheat prices in the United States had been moving downwards- over a long
-period. During the same period, the South Indian paddy price was moving
upwards. The American peak during World War I was very much taner than
the Indian peak. Then the two prices moved in step, and followed a remarkably
similar course - sometimes one leading and sometimes the other- throughout
the period between the two world wars, and since the end of World War II
up to 1948. Whereas, however, the American price has stayed behind at a level
which is just under 200 per cent of the base period level, ours has moved up to
292 per cent.·
63. In our attempt to establish the real existence, to assess the size, and to
determine the rate of growth of our shortage of foodgrains, we have relied so far
only on figures of imports and exports. We have brought in the figUres about
foodgrain prices, as corroborative evidence of a telling nature) and to indicate
how the entire economy in all its parts is detrimentally affected by the present
condition of supplies and prices of foodgrains. We now proceed to a much
*It should perhaps be made clear here that the chart shows the South Indian paddy priccs- not because
they art peculiar-- but because they are the only prices Which happen to be available over such a long
period and they are known to be fully reliable. Their relationship with the U.S. prices durlng the period when
there was an effectively free world market in foodgrains shows that over this period long-tenn trend must
have been the same in respect ofthe grain prices generally in all parts of India. Statistical data showing the
course of prices after free trade ended have been assembled for different grains and different part8 oft~e
country. They will be found among the papers printed a8 ApPENDIX V. They do not m<1dify, in any material particulars, the general 'picture conveyed by this chart relating to South India.
.

170

3:)"Y~

o

o

j

i

o

!

§

1:13d

533dnl:l

~

HI

i

iOI.... AOGVcI

§

,

~

(/)

a:
<I:
w

>o

-LIl

a::

II-Dill

UJ

>
o

10-0011

o

z
w

a:

a::

l-

11-0111

I

en

W

o
a::

Q.

o

8

"

o
2

=

IL-Otll III

o

>I~

bo

......

oCt

D..

Z

-zaoCt

-

't-OH'

......

'~I

Ul
III

2
a::
Q.

~~
r(

IL-sLII

It-OC"

........

'"-0111

:

I §
i- .. "2
II

.! i

;i

II

:0__

8

.

eiovrtR OF· FOoD SHORtAGE
more hazardous undertaking- the direct determination of the shortage "8S the
"difference between production and consumption. Why is" this undertaking
hazardous? About seventy years ago, as we saw, the Famine Commission
atteInpted this task and reached the conclusion that there was a surplus "6fabout
42"lakhs of tons per annum in the territory now divided into India and PaJdstan,
and there was in addition a surplus of about 8 lakhs in Bunna. Two members of
the Commission rejected the figures as well as the conclusion and gave quite
convincing reasons for doing so. Seven decades have passed since then. OUf
state of knowledge is not much bener today. A little less than ten years ago,
the Commission which enquired into the Bengal Famine attempted a similar
task, limited however to the territory and population of undivided Bengal. A
relevant extract from the analysis made by the Commission (part of which is
useful for our enquiry) will be found in ApPENDIX V. The conclusion :reached
by the Commission (which indicates the hazard clearly) runs as follows:
"It may thus be concluded tnat the information available is such that an estimate
of the annual consumption of the province bused on population statistics and an
assumed average rate of individual consumption is likely to err by as much as 2 million
tons- Or about 25 per cent of the estimate. So wide a margin of error blocks this
method of approach."

A few weeks ago, the Department of Economic Affairs of the Government
of India issued a report on the results of the ":First Round" enquiry of the
National Sample Survey. An attempt had been made to ascertain buth production and consumption in rural areas by enquiries made from heads of househe Ids
selected on a random sample basis. The enquiry yielded the following resu~: s :
The average rural household produced 19· fJ maw:ds of foodgrains
every year and ate 26' 4 maunds during eVe1)' year. As this obviously cannot be correct, the report proceeds to distinguish between its consumption
estimate and its production estimate and found reasons for rejecting the
latter and acceptin~ the former as reliable. But then there was a difficulty.
If its consumption estimate was substantially correct then the figures compiled by all the State Governments and the Central Government and annually
published as the estimated yieJd of crops could not also be correct. The
report preferred the consumption estimate ascertained by the" First ROWld "
enqary rnd recorded the opinion " on the basis of the above conclusions,
the magnitude of under-estimation of the official figures of production would
seem to lie between 20 and 27 per cent. of the estimated consumption out of
domestic production". This particular conclusion mayor may not be
correct. Even if it is correct it does 'not prove (as some commentators
thought it dId) that India's production of foodgrains exceeded" its requirements and there was no shortage offoodgrains. What the report does really
111

CHAPTER IV: BEFORE ANb SiNCE t92t
prove in relation to India as a whole is what the Famine Enquiry Commission
had already stated about undivided Bengal. Our knowledge of the absolute
magnitude of either production or consumption i8 subject to a flJide ,margin

oj uncertainty- so wide that it is larger than the magntiude of our shortage.
64, That this is the present state of our knowledge is a fact, and we have

to face it as a fact. But it does not fo11ow, in consequence, that we shall be wise
to bold any opinion we please about food shortage. It does not absolve us from
the obligation to form as sound a judgment as possible on all the evidence
available io us. A detailed study of this evidence will be found in a note entitled
" Production, cons1.U11ption and shortage of foodgrains (1951) ", printed as one
of the papers of ApPENDIX V.
below:

The main

conclusions may be set out as

/ - The average yje1d (less seed) on one acre sown to all foodgrains
is 6' 0 maunds in the country as a whole. The rate is higt e~t in South
India (8'2 maunds) and lowest in West India (3'6 maunds). The
rates in other zones, in Older, are: East India (1' 3), North India
(6'6), North-West India (6'2) and Central India (4' 5).
11- The average rate of consumption of foodgrains per head of population per annum is 4·5 maunds. The rate is highest in North·
West India (5' 0 maunds) and lowest in South India (3' 8 maunds).
The rates in other zones, in order, are: Central India (4.8),
North India (4'6), East India (4'6) and West India (4'0). [No
separate allowance is made for grain fed to cattle and grain wasted
between the field and the kitchen. The rates include such grain also.]

III- India's shortage of foodgrains, round about 1951, was 34 lakhs of
tons- being the difference between 590 lakhs of tons of consumption
and 556 lakhs of harvested yield (less seed). The shortage is equivalent to the foodgrains needed for consumption during 21 days in the
year. Among the zones, the shortage is negligible in Central India
and relatively small in North India and North-West India.
The shortages in the other three zones expressed in the number of
days of consumption requirements are as follows: West India (67 days),
South India (34 days) and East India (17 days). It should be clearly
borne in mind that these are only the best estimates which can be
framed on the basis of official figw-cs of acreage and yield of crops.
They may be wrong_ The total production may be higher. If so, the
total consumption must also be higher correspondingly.
172

CROWTB OF FOOD SHORTAGE

6S. A great many people are puzzled by the fact that the shortage is adminedly
a small proportion of total consumption- the food needed for only :n days in the
.year. Why should there be so much difficulty about managing without imports
and without controls? This question has been posed and conclusively answered
in a number of reports- a few relevant extractS will be found in ApPENDIX V.
It is necessary that the answer should be understood and conviction attained that

free trade cannot junction in a market which is genuinely short of foodgrainshowefJef' small the shortage. •
.
66. Another question arises in relation to the relative smallness of the shortage
of foodgrains. We have seen that about thirty years ago, undivided India was
neither a net exporter nor a not importer of foodgrains. At that time production
per capita and consumption per capita were in balance. Since then, there has
been a decline of cultivation per capita of not less than, say, one-fifth. If our
rate of consumption per capita had been 4' 5 maunds then, as it is assessed to be
now, then the shortage today must be of the order of o· 9 maunds- nine -tenths
of a maund to a maund per capita. But this is assessed at about 34 lakhs of tons
per. annum in absolute quantity or rather less than o· 3 of a maund per capita.
The difference is Jarge and it raises an important issue. We can understand why
imports have been steadily growing. Once we admit cultivation per capita
has been declining for 30 years and the percentage of foodgrain cultivation
remained substantially the same, the need for imports on an increasing scale
is clear and calls for no further explanation. What needs explanation is- why
the imports were not so much larger than they actually were. If the figures so far
mentioned are correct, the correct level of imports should be about 100 lakhs
of tons. Why are they only 34 lakhs of tons? We must face this questionnot as a matter of arithmetical curiosity- because of its implications for the
future.
What are the possible explanations ?

First,- Our assessment of the decline of cultivation per capita was based on
areas for 'which we had statistics. Could it be that in the areas for which there
were no statistics, cultivation kept pace with population and there was no
decline, or a smaller rate of decline. This is not impossible, for these are generally backward areas, where modern transportation and commercialised agriculture might have been late in arriving. But the net effect on the average rate
of decline for India could not have been very large.

Secondiy,- We took note only of double-cropping and irrigation as the factors which might have raised the yield per acre of cW.tivated land. What about
173

CHAPTJ£R .IV: BEFORE AND SINCE I921

o$er faCtors? Could it be that the scale of manuring has increased. For a
number of reasons this seems very unlikely; the contrary is mOTe probable.
. Could it be that cultivators put in more effort and got a better yield. The
" efficial estimates' of yield over a long period do not show any such thing;
l;JUt that is not very conclusive, because they are not refined methods of measurement and might have easily failed to detect a very small but pervasive increase,
if it had occurred gradually over a IOIig period. This possibility is. not to be
dismissed lightly ; because when people have to emact a subsistence out of the
same land for larger numbers, they do have a strong incentive to look after cultivation better and more people to do it with. During the thirties especially,
cultivators had an extremely bad time. It was precisely when prices were
very low, they were obliged to mobilise and sell all the grain they could grow in
order to meet their money obligations which were then very heavy. Getting in
the extra quantity of grain was much more important then, than it had been
during the last decade. There may, therefore, have been something in thisthough it is very difficult to put a figure on it.

Thirdly,- It seems likely that a progressive reduction of wastage of grain
and its use as cattle-feed might have occurred. Some old estimates supplied to
the Famine Commsission of 1880 (which will be found in ApPENDIX V) seem
extremely generous today. It is common experience that people teRd to waste
more when they have more to waste.
Fourthly,- It may be that, as population increased under conditions of growing food shortage) the average rate of oonsumption has also fallen. Is this likely?'
It is generally believed, with fairly good reason, that cultivators throughout tbe
COWltry have been eating better during the last decade than during the preceding
decade. The results of some diet surveys made within the last ten years lend
support to this belief. During the thirties, the abnormal faU of prices compelled
sales of grain which might have forced cultivators on the margin to stint themselves. This pressure has been wholly removed and along with it.. no doubt, the
stinting. Except in areas which are liable to drought, cultivating labourers are
in a stronger bargaining position vis-a-vis cultivators than they used to be; and it
is likely that they are less underfed than they used to be.
In areas where prohibition has worked successfully, it is likely that there has
been an increase of purchasing capacity and better consumption of grain. All
these are indications to the contrary. At the same time there has been a very
large ·growth of urban population. The average level of grain consumption in
towns is lower than in villages. It is possible that the migrants from villages to
towns are more largely drawn from the poorest classes of villagers, and they may

174

GROWTH OF FOOD SHORTAGE

have relatively lower rates of grain consumption. On a balance of all considerations, it seems likely that 'When population grows in number in conditions of
growing food shortage the average level of food consumplion does tend 10 jall,.
that this tendency was probably fully operative during the thirties and that
it probably continued to be operative during the forties also, though not perhaps to the same extent as during the thirties.

175

CHAPTER V

The Prospect-I 98 I
A - Future Growth of Population
the world, Great Britain has perhaps the largest assembO lage of the mostinreliable
population data, extending in a systematic timeF ALL COUNTRIES

series over the longest period in the past. Yet when the Royal Commission on
population set out to "examine the facts relating to the present population trends
in Great Britain ; to investigate the causes of these trends and to consider their
probable consequences ; to consider what measures, if any, should be taken
in the national interest to influence the future trend of population and to make
recommendations", it found the data insufficient in material particulars. So,
arrangements were made for special enquiries to be conducted in order to
provide the additional information required by the Commission.
After a thorough analysis and prolonged study of abundant material, the
Commission achieved a forecast of the future growth of population. Before
setting out and discussing the forecast, the Commission made the following
preliminary observations :
"In this and the following chapter we shall try to follow the trend of population some way into the future. Our first and main concern wj)l be to explore
the prospects of natural increase. Making the asswnption that there is no net
migration, we shall seek to find out how the population might develop under
the influence of fertility and mortality alone ..... .
"We shal1 have to begin by looking at the existing population, which naturally
conditions future possibilities. We shall be led thereby into a consideration
of the number of probable survivors at various future dates of the population
now living, and for this purpose it will be necessary to make some assumptiom
about future deaths. We shall have, therefore, to consider in the light of palt
history and present knowledge what seems likely to be the trend of mortality
rates in future. To complete the picture it will be necessary to have figures
for the nUJl1bers in the age groups not yet born, and this involves forecasting
future fertility rates. The analysis we have made of the past suggests that this
will have to be taken in two stages- (I) forecasting the number of married couples
and (2) forecasting marital fertility rates. We must emphasize that we do not
use the word 'forecast' here in the sense of confident prediction ; the procedure
will rather be to work out the consequences of variOUl alternatives within the

177

CHAPTER V:

THE PROSPECT-I98I

bounds of reasonable probability. It i!; when we come to the foreca9ting of
births that the!;e bounds are widest and the prediction of the numbers of any
group containing persons as yet unborn is, therefore, particularly difficult."

The passage has been reproduced because it explains clearly what is
involved in the attempt to peer into the future in order to form an opinion about
future numbers, the nature of the data required for the attempt and the strictly
conditional nature of the results to be expected. We shall presently see the
application of these observations to ourselves. It is, however, not irrelevant
for purposes of this report to set out at this stage the forecast made by the
Commission of the future of the British population.
2.

3. The total population of Great Britain had been 105 lakhs in 1801. This
had grown, at an enormously rapid rate, to 370 lakhs in 1901. The 195 1
Census showed the number had grown further (though more slowly) to 488
lakhs. The Commission (making its calculations in 1947) looked into the
future for a century ahead. It made three clifferent assumptions which led
to three different conclusions as below :
TABLE 1
(IN LAKHS)

Year

First
assumption

assumption

Third
assumption

1962

502

499

508

1977

50 7

486

518

2007

489

41 5

523

2047

455

296

527

Second

All the three assumptions relate to the future of the 'family size' (by which
term, the Commission refers to the average of the total number of children
born to every married woman, on completion of her child-bearing period). If
the present level (indicated by the actual experience of women who married
during the years 1927 to 1938) remained unaltered in future, the rate of growth
of population will slow down and stop sometime towards the end of this century
and a reduction of numbers will begin. But the reduction will be small- there
would be 455 lakhs in 2047. But if the tendency to reduction of the 'family
size' continues further and stability is attained only at four-fifths of the present
level, then the reduction of nwnbers will start much earlier and occur more
rapidly. There would be only 296 lakhs in 2047. If, however, the present
level is slightly increased- by 6 per cent unly- and stability is attained at this

178

FUTURE GROWTH OF POPULATION

slightly higher level, a slow rate of growth may be kept up for a very long time
and the possibility of absolute decline in numbers postponed for at least a
century. Accepting these conclusions as data, the Commission then proceeded
to discuss the social, economic and other implications of these different possibilities for the future.

4. From what has been said earlier in this report, it will be observed that
we do not possess population data which can be compared even remotely with
those available to the Royal Commission. Our attempt to peer into the future
must, therefore, be limited to a relatively short time ; and our conclusions must
be based on methods of deduction of a much less rigorous nature. To make
two simple alternative assumptions first, let us suppose that during each of the
TABLE 2
three decades 195 1-60, 1961-70 and
1971-80 the mean decermial rate
Lower Upper
of growth of population will
Year
limit
limit
be- (a) the same as that of the
3,613
3,613
average of the three decades
195 1
1921-50 ; or (b) the same as that
0
11
1961
•
4. 77
4. 9
of the latest of the same three
197 1 •
4,697
4.5 85
decades (when the growth rate
5,276
5,355
was highest). These two assumptions may be regarded as yielding
the lower and upper limits (TABLE 2) of the probable future figures.
5. The foregoing table shows the results of a very simple .calculation.
Another line of approach- which involves somewhat more complioated calculations- yields the figures of TABLE 3 on next page. They represent
a forecast for the years 1961, 1971 and 1981 of the population of three
states (Uttar Pradesh, Madras and Madhya Pradesh) showing the total number, its division into three broad age-groups (viz., under 15, 15 to 54 and 55
and over), and their subdivision by sexes. The foreca"r is based on the
following assumptions :
First,- Apart from the disappeareance of child marriages, there will be
no material change in marital or conjugal habits; married women of
the same number and the same age will be giving birth to approximately the same number of children during each of. the thirty years
1951-1980 ~ on an. average of the thirty years 1921-50.
Second(v,.- The mortality rates in every age-group will be approximately
the same during each of the next thirty yearf, 1951-1980 as on an
average of the thirty years 1921-SO.
.
.

179

CHAPTER V

THE PROSPECT-lgBI
TABLE 3

PofnIIIJIit:m
(IN nroUSANDS)

15-54

0-14

A/fIJI's

~

,

~

55 and tIWr

M

P

6

7

8

9

10

8,237
9, 189
10,225
II,696
14,671
16.3 03

13,53 1
14,37 1
16,21 I
17,715
19,275
21,473
24,132

12,287
12,870
14,635
15,836
17,683
19,733
22,439

1,687
1,595
2,136
2,735
3,050
3,251
3,388

1,694
1,571
2,033
2,586
2,835
2,955
3,051

7,672
8,744
9m3
10,334
12,234
13,055
15,279

7,648
8,64 1
9,633
10,291
12,12:1
12,937
15,086

10,763
II,77 I
13,233
15,599
16,9 15
18,831
20,986

JI,252
12,3 02
J3,575
15,804
17,172
J9,033
:2.1,306

1,625
1,576
J,79O
2,486
2,879
3,137
3,3 83

1,633
1,616
1,827
2,502
2,909
3,J80
3,3 89

3,285

3,194
3,543
3,71 I
4,OJ4
4,469
4,907
SA9 2

4,070
4,759
5,32S
5,758
6,293
6,958
7,693

4,08 5
4,721
5,271
5,627
6,172
6,768
7,S12

536
544
699
768
867
965

627
62 9
813
944
1,067
1,202
1,293

Y,M

P

M

P

I

:2

3

4

24,4SI
26,147
29,639
33,098
36,641
40,677
4S,644

22,218
23,630
26,893
30,u8
33,3 6 9
37,359
41,793

9,233
10,181
II,292
12,648
14,316
15,953
18,124

20,060
22,091
24,796
28>4 19
32,028
35,023
39,648

20,S33
2:1,559
:1.5,035
28,597
3:1, 20 3
35,150
39,781

7,891
8,899
9,837
10,663
11,745
12,934
14,340

7,906
8,893
9,795
10,585
II,708
12,877
14,296

M

P

M

P

Uttar Pradesh
1921
193 1
1941
1951
19"!

1971

198r

46.669

49.777

5'.532

63,.116
70 ,017
78,036

87.0437

12,8~p

Madral
1921
1931
1941
1951
1961
1971
198 1

4°.593
44,650
4,,831
57,016
'4.a31
70,173
79,439

Madhya Pradelh
1921
193 1
1941
1951
1961
1971
1981

'1.5,79'
1',792
1',632
21,141

23,453
25,811
28,'3 6

3'i96

3, 13
4,137
4,585
,,011
$,6)2

I,OIS

NOTE- All perlons who were aged 10 and over at the Census of 1931 were all alive in 1921
.nc! mUlt have been counted at the 1921 Cenlul. It fa possible to identify the corresponding numbers,
.-aroup by age-group. Thus we may compare the number agtd IS to %4 in 1921 with the number
aged 25 to 34 In 193 I and express the latter as a proportion of the fonner. This can be done for
three successive ten·year periods (1921-30, 1931-40 and 1941-50) and an average struck. In this
manner an average (which maybe called the 'Iurviving population rate') can be strUck for every agegroup Into which all penons aled 10 and over are divided and for the two ,exe. separately. This is
the fint step.

All penons who Were under age 10 at the Census of 1931 must have been born after the 1921
Crnlu8. They may be divided into four groups : under age 5 and between agel 5 to 9. leparately
for malea and females. Theae are the four 'new population' groups at each census. It is assumed
tMC their numbers arc correlated directly to the mean of the numbers of women aged 15 to 44 at two
lucceuive censuses. The mUltiplying facton which when applied to the latter will yield the former.
are then worked out for each of the three decade.. Their average f8 then struck for the three
decade_ they may be called the 'new population rltell·. This completes the aecond .tep.
We then proceed to the third step which consists ofthree atages. Pirst, the surviving population
rates are applied to the 195 I Census figures and we get the age-groups by sexes for 1961 ofall persons
aged 10 and over. The application of the new population rate. then completes the 1961 figures by
yielding the numbers ofmalcs under age 5, males aged 5 to 9, females under agc S and females aged S
to 9. The proceu il repeated with reference to the 1961 figures thUB obtained, and the 1971 figures
are .ecured. By a repetition of the same process in relation to the 1971 tiSUre., 1981 fiaure. Ire
obtained.
.

ISo

roruu GROwn OF POPULAnON
We shall consider presently whether these assumptions are reasonable
and likely to hold good. But assuming they do, the results for the three states
may be fairly expected to be as indicated in TABLE 3. We may (by a further
deduction) arrive at a minimal estimate of the future growth of population for
the country as a whole up to 1981 as shown in the table below:
TABLE 4

GrorDth of popultJlion
(P"" actuaU sin&.1891)

Grt1rMh 0/ popul4licm
(Minimal urimatu ..pto 1981)

~--------~------------,

IIIC'IftU

Jncrlau ;

d",;",
precedini

Year

10 yean

Populalion

durirw

Year

Population

prlUdi"ll
10 yam

(IN LAICHS)

(IN LAICHS)

195 1

·

3,61 3

44'

0

1961

·

4,0'78

465

2,522

138

1971

·

40.5 2 7

449

1921

2,514

Decrease

IgSI

•

,,157

630

1931

2,791

277

1 941

3,168

377

1951

3,613

445

1891

2.384-

19(>1

2,384

1911

NOTB- The figures include the Itate of Jammu and Kaslunir and allow for 'inflation' in the 1941
Census by an estimated 20 lakhs.

The calculations which yielded the forecasts furnished in TABU 3 for the
three states are explained in the note below the table. Calculations of the
same nature were not attempted for the country as a whole because of difficulties
in reconstructing age/sex details with reference to territorial changes. The
forecast for India was deduced from the forecast for the three states·_ Uttar
Pradesh, Madras and Madhya Pradesh. These three stat~- which had added
• It i. pos.ible to compute forecasts for Bombay, in the aame manner 81 for the three IUtu mentioned
above. But it was not considered ..fe to apply the AIDe calculations to that ltate in view of the laqe pan
played by miaration in the growth of population of that ltate. If it i8 justifiable to Blume that mlaradon
would continue on the l8IIle .caIe up to 1981 (thi. i. not very likel,,) the (orecaat {or Bombay wouk! be • Itcady
growth from 360 Iakhs in I9SI to 427 Iaklu in 1961. S071akha in 1971 and 6071akb. in 1981. When theac
fiaurel were added to those of other three ltatea and alternative (oreca.~. for India were deduced by comparison with the total of all the four ltatel inclusive of Bombay. the RaullS were .. followI: 4.073 Iakba in 1961.
1akhs in 1971 and s,z]6lakbs in 1981. These filurel (wbJch. arc not 10 very different from the minimal
eltimatel furnished in TABU! 4 above) pve an indication of the order of maltlitude of the uncertainty
involftd in our nCCCIIIIriJy roqb calCIIIations.

4.,8,.

181

CHAPTER V:

THE PROSPECT-I(jh

to their population during 1921-50, 3841akhs- will add 540 lakhs during 1951-80.
India had added to its population during 1921-50, 1,099 lakhs. Assuming that
its growth dwing 1951-80 will bear the same proportion to its growth during
1921-50 as the three states combined, the addition during 1951-80 should
be 1,544 lakhs. The figures for growth up to 1971 and 1961 are also arrived
at by like reasoning.
6. Both types of calculations are of a rough and ready nature. One type
of calculation makes some sort of allowance for differences in rates of growth
likely to be caused by changes in the age-sex pattern; the other type does not.
The important thing to note is not the exact figures--for it is no use attempting to forecast in units smaller than a crore. What should be noted is the fact
that, if we start with the assumption that the future growth will be limited by
the experience of 1921-50, we get by different methods numbers of much the
same order-- 41 crores in 1961, 46 crores in 1971 and 52 crores in 1981.
We should also note from TABLE 2 that the figures we are likely to get by assuming that future growth will reproduce the experience of 1941 -50 throughout
the next thirty years would be higher, but not very much higher. Are we
right in assuming thaT maternity rates and mortality rates will be the same during
the next thirty years, as during the last thirty years? Do we have any indications from past experience which would help us to answer this question? Let
us review the pa... t briefly from this point of view. In doing so, we should
make a distinction between two quite different sets of questions. We have
already seen that the period of thirty years before 1921 differed sharply from
the thirty-year period since 1921. The difference, as we have seen, consists
in the virtual elimination (barring one exception) of deaths from famine and
pestilence ; and the commencement of a process of significant reduction in
what may be called normal mortality. May we assume that these gains are
permanent? Or should we accept as a possibility that famine and pestilence
may return and the level of normal mortality may rise again, within the next
thirty years? Let us dismiss this possibility from our mind for the present
and assume that the gains are pennanent. We shall enquire whether, on a
comparison of 1921-30 with 1931-40 and the laller with 1941-50, there is such
a dtfinite trend as regards changes either of mortal£cy rates or of maternity
rates or both that we should expect the growth of population during 1951-80
to be substantially faster or substantially slower than during 1921-50.
7. For information on these trends we have to turn to the statistics of
registration of births and deaths- which, as already explained, are defective
in many ways. In the country as a whole, the system of registration has been
182

FUTURE GROWTH OF POPULATION

in force throughout the period 1921-50 in roughly three-quarters of the country
(on a population basis), The following table shows the numbers of births and
deaths which were registered in each of the three decades, as well as the average
birth rates and average death rates for each decade derived therefrom:
TABLE 5

Decade

Registered
births
(rN LAKHS)

Registered
deaths
(IN LAKHS)

Mean

Mean

decennial
birth rate
(Registered)

decennial
death rate
(Registered)

25'3
23'0

19'4

-40

753

512

33'7
33'S

1941-50

680

486

27'2

502

193 1

Before proceeding to draw any inferences from these figures we should observe
that the birth rate is deduced to be 27'2 for the decade 1941-50 when we have
already in an earlier chapter, concluded that the correct level is 40, Evidently,
32 per cent of all births escaped registration during 1941-50 (apart from the
fact that the births occurring among a quarter of the popUlation were not attempted to be registered at all), Similarly, the registered deaths yield a death rate of
19' 4 when we have reason to believe the true death rate was 27. It follows
that 28 per cent of all deaths escaped registration during 1941-50, in the areas
where regi& tration was being effected.
8, It is usual to assume that the rates derived from the registration data
for different years may be compared with one another and correct conclusions
drawn regarding time-trends even. though the absolute values are incorrect.
The assumption would be justified so long as we are dealing with areas in which
the omissions are not unduly large and with periods during which the system
was worked with much the same degree of efficiency year after year, without
any material improvement or deterioration. Whether this assumption holds
good of the comparison between 1921-30 and 1931-40 is doubtful; it is certain
that it is wholly inapplicable to the comparison between 1931-40 and 1941-5 0
even in those states where the omissions are not unduly large, This negative
conclusion is so important that the reasons should be placed on record:

First,- We may observe from the figures of TABLE 5 that it is not merely
the registered birth rates and registered death rates which have
fallen; the absolute numbers of registered births and registered deaths
have also fallen, This raises the suspicion that what we are witnessing
may not be a fall in the number of births but a rise in the number
of binhs which have escaped registration.

CSAP'l'ER V:

Tn MtOSPECT-l98l

Seco1tdly,- The suspicion is confirmed when we compare the difference
between the birth rate and death rate, with the growth rate ascertained by the census. The difference is 7' 8 during 1941-50
against a growth rate of 13 . I whereas it had been 10· 8 during
1931-40 against a growth rate of 12·7. To put the matter in
another way, the registered rates show the birth rate to have
fallen more rapidly than the death rate. If we may ignore the
effects of migration, this would mean a substantial reduction
of the rate of growth. But the census figures show that there
was no reduction of the rate of growth. We have good reasons to
believe that migration cannot have affected the rate of growth
in the country as a whole by even as much as one per cent
(though the position is different in certain zones). The figures
confirm the suspicion that the system of registration of births
and deaths might have been working much Jess efficiently
during 1941-50 than in 1931-40. The comparison between the
decades may be bringing to light a fall in the registration of
births and not necessarily a fall in the actual number of births.
The point was specially examined by every Superintendent of Census
Operations in relation to conditions in his state. The converging testimony
of all officers- which will be found in the State Census Reports- confirms the
view that there bas been a definite deterioration in the efficiency of registration.
This conclusion need not cause any surprise. During the war and for some
years thereafter, the district administrative establishments were loaded with too
much new work in connection initially with the prosecution of the war and later
increasingly with the problem of keeping food supplies moving and prices under
control. 'Routine' work of every description suffered, including the maintenance of adequate supervision over the staff entrusted with the duties of registration of births and deaths and submission of returns relating to them.
Comparison of the data relating to 1921-30 with those of 1931-40 is not
vitiated in the same way; though, even here, it seems possible that special
efi"ortJ undertaken in some areas to improve the efficiency of the system may
have also introduced an element of non-comparability.
9. We may now make the following observations on the figures for India

in TABLE 5 :
(,) The registered birth rate was the same during 1931-40 as during 1921-30.
This is probably true also of the actual birth rate.
184

trt.Ttt1U GROWTli 0" POpoutIO)t
(i.) The registered death rate during 1931-40 was smaller than that of 192130, There was probably a genuine fall in the actual death rate,
(ia) There are large reductions, both in the registered birth rates and
registered death rates, when we compare 1941-50 with 1931-40;
the reduction of the registered birth rate actually exceeding that of the
registred death rate. It should not be supposed that the true birth rates
and true death rates changed in this manner. It is not possihle to say,
from these figures alone, whether they changed at all; and if so, how,
Among the states where births and deaths are registered, there are only
four in which it has been computed that the omissions are fewer than one in
four during 1941-50 ; and consequently, even smaller, in earlier decades, These
are, in order of efficiency of registration: Punjab, Madras, Madhya llradesh a'nd
Bombay. Let us observe the trends disclosed by the registration data in these
states, as shown in the table below :
IO,

TABLE 6
Registered birth rale

Nal/UTai
division

Stal,

Registered death rate

1921-30 1931-40 1911-50 1921-30 1931-40 1~41-50

Punjab

• {Himalayan ,
Plain •
,

34'7
41'2

35'8
43'6

34'1
40'0

31'4
30'3

26'9
26'3

23'S
.23'9

Madras

,

JDeccaD
West,

3.5'7
3.5'S
30 '9
31 '0

38 '5
35'0
34'7
34'0

33' 1
31'3
3°'5
30 '4

2Y7
22'2
21 '3
21'9

26'1
.20'6
22'4
21'9

2.2'7
18'3
20'7
20'7

38 '9

39'S

35'3

27'7

26'0

24'4

37'4
36 '2

38 '9

3S'S

36 '0
36'2

27'2
26'7

26'3
26'6

24'S

. 33'9

18'S

25'4
33'0

23'1
27"0

28' I
23'3

21'1
21 '3

16'0
18'3

41'2
39'4
43'S

43'7
39'2

36 '8
35'2
39'4

32 '5

North
lSouth

Bombay

,

/0=-

Northern
DeccanSouthern

l
Madhya
Pradesh

Gujrat
Greater
Bombay
Konkan

( North-West
,
'
l South-West

~ East

41'1

29'8
33'3

35'0

27"8
33'6

24'S

31 '5

28'1
32 '1

Though we have had to exclude all the areas where the registration data are
too defective for purposes of assessing trends, we are left in TABLB 6 with figures
for sufficiently large and widely dispersed areas in the country, Whatever
inferences are legitimately drawn from these figures would probably reflect the

ISS

CHAPTEn v:

1lIE PROS}?ECT~lg81

true position in the COlliltry as a whole. The following inferences seem aedible
to the present writer :

(i) Changes between 1921-30 and 1931-40- The general picture is made
up of two features : one- a definitely rising or stationary birth rate ; and
the other- a significant, though rather small, fall in the death rate.
The rise in the birth rate was probably associated with a passing change
in the age structure, reflecting the abnormal consequences of selective
mortalities of influenza) plague and famine in earlier decades. In some
places (e.g., North Madras and South .Madras) the rise may be probablY
deceptive and indicative merely of the results of special efforts to improve
the efficiency of registration.
(ii) Changes between 1931-40 and 1941-50- The general picture is made
up of two features: jirst,- there is a fall in the birth rate which
consists in part of the cancellation of the rise which had occurred in the
earlier decade and in part also of a further fall below the levels reached in
1921-30 ; and secondly,- there is a further drop in the death rate between
1931-40 and 194I-50 which is a shade more pronounced than the
drop which had occurred between 1921-30 and I93I-40.
Where an earlier increase in the birth rate (or death rate) had been due to
improvement in the registration of births and deaths, it is almost certain that
the improvement was not maintained and a set-back occurred. To this extent,
there was no real change in either decade. It is also possible that- even where
there was no special improvement originally- deterioration in registration has
occurred in the last decade and has exaggerated the trends. After making due
allowance for such vagaries of registration, it is difficult to rule out the possibility that the true birth rate of 1921-30 might have been a little higher than the
true birth rate of 1941-50 (viz., 40). We should accept it as probable that there
has, in fact, been a small reduction of the birth rate. We are on much firmer
ground about the death rate. The trend of the death rate differs from that of
the birth rate in two ways: the former has fallen in both-decades successively,
whereas the lattet has moved up and down; and, the drop in the death rate is
clearly visibile to the naked eye, while that of the birth rate is microscopic.
II. The fact that the true death rate of 1941-50 must have been definitely
lower than the true death rate of 1921-30 is brought out independently by the
Life Tables which have been computed for the two periods- by Shri L. S.
VAIDYANATIIANforthefonnerand by Shri S. P. JAIN for the latte1. The life
table data are fully discussed in Shri JAIN'S report. The salient features are as
follows.

186

FUtURE GROWTH OF POPULAnON

The expectation of life, at any particular age, is a good index of the net
result of the incidence of mortality at all subsequent ages. But the nature of
the data used for purposes of calculation is such that a good deal of guess-work
enters into this factor at very young ages. The values of expectation of Hfe
at birth must, therefore, be treated with some reserve ; but the values for
expectation of life at higher ages may be relied upon more confidently. The
relevant figures are shown below :
TABLE 7

I!) 21-30

Expectation of life
at binh

26 years and

Expectation of life
at age 10

36 years and
5 months

I I months

1941-50

Increase ift
expecraticm of life
during 2Q years

32 years and 5 years and 6 months
5 months
39 years

2 years and 7 months

These figures leave no room for doubt that there has been a significant increase
in the expectation of life- which is the same thing a.<; a significant decline
of mortality rates. This conclusion indicates a trend of which we should take
notice when making estimates of future growth. But before following up that
point, a brief digression is necessary in order to prevent the possibility of any
sense of complacency arising out of our finding that the death rate has, in fact,
fallen and the expectation of life has increased.
12. The expectation of life at age 10 is 59'0 to 60 in England

and Wales,
Australia and New Zealand. It is 56 in the United States of America, about
50 in Japan and 47 in Egypt. It is now 39 in India. We continue to retain the
unpleasant distinction of having the lowest expectation of life among all the
peoples for whom figures are available.

13. We should also remember that preventable deaths continue to occur in
especially heavy numbers among infants and young children under age 5. Our
infonnation about mortality rates at different ages is very poor. The best
judgment which the present writer is able to form on this subject from available
data is furnished in TABLE 8 on next page.

CHAPtER V : THE PROSPEct-1gB1
TABLE 8

Number of deaths occurring amont 1,000
persons of all ages drmng anyone year (1941-50)
Under
age 5

Ages
5 to 54:

21 or 22

8 Or 9

7 or 8

6

26

II

9

6

27 or 28

II

10 or II

6

34

IS

13

6

27

II

10

6

All
South India
(Madras)
West India
(Hombay)

.

Nonh India
(Uttar Pradesh)
Centrallndia .
(Madhya Pradesh)
INDIA

Ages

t/lu

55 and Of)'"

In all the four zones for which available data permit a judgment, it will be seen
that the number of deaths occurring undel' age 5 equals or exceeds the number
of deaths occurring at all ages between 5 and 54; and is substantially in excess
of the deaths occurring among elderly persons aged 55 and over.

14· The mortality of children under age 5 is heavy. Among them the
mortality of infants, who die before they complete one year of age, is especially
heavy. It is true that our infant monality rate is diminishing. During the
decade ending 193 I, it was 176 infant deaths per 1,000 births. During the
next decade, it was 164. During the last decade, it was 152. These are the
figures based on registration. When we allow for omissions in registration
(which are almost certainly more numerous among infants who die shortly
after birth than among infants who survive), the true rates would probably
be higher than these figures (which are, even as they stand, extreme]y
high). We have seen that out oj 27 deaths of persons of all ages (which occur
annually among 1,000 persons in India) 11 deaths occur among children under
5 years of age. Out oj these 11 deaths, it is almost certain that" occur among
infants who have not completed om year of age. This appalling waste of life
and maternal suffering, so largely preventable, goes on day after day in all parts
of the country. .Madhya Pradesh seems to have an unenviable distinction.
Whereas in the country as a whole, 40 child births occur every year among
1,000 people, Madhya Pradesh has 44. Whereas in the country as a flJhoie,
7 infants die before they are one year old, the number in Mudhya Pradesh is 11.
The entire excess of births is matched by an equal excess of infant deaths.
t88

FUTURE GROWTH OF POPULATION

15. Let us now leave these tmpleasant figures behind and resume our
discussion of trends during the last three decades. We may be satisfied that
there has been a real drop in the death rate from decade to decade. The drops
are real though they are small. They reflect the modest success, which has

undoubtedly been achieved in successive decades, in reducing the incidence of
premature death of the type which is normal in our country.
What about the rise and fall of the birth rates, from which we concluded
that there was perhaps a net diminution of the birth rate to a small extent
dwing 1941-50 as compared with the level of 1921-301 The changes would
appear to be attributable to two causes of which one is indicated by the figures
in the table below :
TABLE 9

Number of married females per 1,000 persons
of both sexes and all ages in
~

(

Madras

Bombay

73
71

Tl.

L35-44

74
71
42

38

37

43

15 to 44

187

182

178

191

76
72
43

74
70
38

78

80

70
36

7S

191

182

18.f

197

73

67

74
71

69

18S

191

Decade

Age-group

1921 -30

~ 25-34

r 15-2 4

1 1 5-24

~ 25-34

L3S-44

15 to 44

1941-50

Madhya
Pratksh

Uttar
Pradesh

11 5- 2 4

~ 25-34

L35-44

70
46

69
42

IS to 44

189

178

69

40

7S
73

42

76

46

N011!- The figure for each decade is arithmetical mean of two figures computed from the
data relating to the censUSes at the beginning and end of the decade.

It will be observed that the figures of Madhya Pradesh, Bombay and Uttar
Pradesh show significant increases in the numbers of married women of child.
bearing age from 1921-30 to 1931-40, while those of Madhya Pradesh and
Madras show significant decreases from 1931-40 to. 1941-50. A detailed analysis
of such changes in Madhya Pradesh (the analysis took into account changes within
natural diVisions) shows that they must be du~ to the distortions caused by
selective" mortality inflicted by the great influenza epidemic on I generation

189

I

CHAPTER V:

THE PROSPECT-I<)81

whose age structure had been distorted by the great famines of the deal~
1891- 1900. There is little doubt that. where there are real ups and downs m
the birth rate (and not merely ups and downs in the efficiency o~ registration of
births), the principal operative cause has been the changes m the age-sex
structure arising in the manner just described. That is probably the correct
explanation of the ups and downs of the binh rate. But is it a complete
explanation also of the finding that there is a net resultant drop? It is very
difficult to say. It is not impossible that the average age of marriage of girls
may have risen somewhat and caused this net resultant drop. The rise in the
age of marriage may have come about, as a result of the Child Marriage Restraint
Act of 1929- even though (as pointed out in an earlier chapter) the law still
continues to be disregarded by quite considerable numbers of people in many
parts of India. It must be borne in mind, however, that the net resultant
drop, for which an explanation is sought, is so very small that the reality of its
existence has to be established by elaborate argument.
16. In the light of this review of the past what do we infer about the future ?

So far as maternity is concerned, our assessment of the past does not indicate a trend which would justify us in assuming any very materially different
future unless something happens which leads to the wide-spread adoption of
contraception- a contingency which we shall reserve for later discussion. The
position is different about mortality. Our assessment of the past would justifY
Us in assuming that a further decline of mortality might take place in the next
thirty years. It is perfectly obvious that a large proportion of deaths which
occur at present are preventable. There is, therefore, quite considerable scope
for reduction of mortality, especially among infants and very young children.
It jollows that (unless the rate oj growth oj populatz'on is checked by contraception ur a breakdown of food supply of such a serious nature as to entail a
return to the abnormal mortality
TABLE 10
conditions of 1891-1900) population
will increase during 1951-80 at a
Population
faster
rate than during 1921-50.
YeaT
(IN CRORES)
Nevertheless, it is expedient for purposes of further discussion that we
should accept a furecast which errs on
J'17 J
•
the side of under-statement rather
1981 •

than the contrary. With reference
to the two sets of figures already mentioned (in TABLES 2 & 4) let us finally
assume ,hat the future growth of population will be as shOfDn in TABU 10.
Igo

FUTURE GROWTH OF POPULATION

17· We have seen that during the three decades before 1951, cultivation
per cap£za has been steadily declining and food shortage growing. We shall
examine, in the last section, whether these tendencies will be arrested and
reversed during the next three decades. In doing so we shall endeavour to

think quanutatively. Shall we be able to develop agriculture so as to keep pace
atk the numbers specified in TABLE IO? That is the question we shall seek
to answer.
Before we start, let us be quite clear about this- our growth in numbers
may prove to be even faster than is shown by TABLE 10. It will not be slower.
It is nearly as certain as any prediction can possibly be that our number will
rise to 52 crores round about 1981, unless any of the two developments occurred
beforehand. The first of these conceivable developments may be described as the
'catastrophe'. Our food shortage which has grown in the past, in the manner
described in the last chapter, might- if permitted- grow still further) with the
result that the distribution of food supplies might breakdown (as it did in 1943,
in Bengal). If this happens over extensive areas for a few years in succession, it
will bring in its wake famine and epidemic diseases on the scale which prevailed
during 1891-1900. Our assumption that 1951-80 will be governed by the
trends of 1921-50 in respect of mortality, would have broken down.
The second contingency may be described as the 'near-miracle'. Our
womenfolk might begin to practise contraception and voluntarily limit childbearing, as they are doing in Western European countries today. In that case,
our assumption that 1951-80 will be governed by the trends of 1921-50 in respect of maternity, would have broken down.
IS. If we assume (as most people would like to do) that the 'catastrophe'
will not be permitted to occur and that the 'near-miracle' should not also be
counted on, then we are committed to the development of agriculture at a rate
sufficient to feed at least 52 crores of people in 19SI. Can we do this? The
answer to this question, according to the best judgment of the present writer
is in the negative. The reasons are explained in the next section. The conclusion is then drawn that we must count on the 'near-miracale' and bring it about
while we a1'f developinb agriculture as fast as we can. This view is explained
in the next succeeding section of this chapter.

191

CHAPTER V:

THE PR05PECT-I9~h

B - Agricultural Productivity: development targets
19. When we discuss agricultural development and frame programmes and
targets therefor, it is convenient to use two different terms- 'productivity' and
'production'- to signify two different things. We often hear, for instance, of
planning the production of rice or wheat so as to get so many lakhs of tons in
such and such a year. But that is not possible. It may be possible to plan
ahead the production of a particular year in mines or factories, but it is not
possible to do it on farms. For, the monsoons are (at any rate at present) beyond
the control of man. The vicissitudes of the seasons alter the yield of
crops) from one year to the next, by much larger amounts than any increase
which can be brought about by human contrivance within the same time. This
does not mean that agricultural development cannot be achieved by planning.
On the contrary, we have perhaps reached a stage in the development of agriculture when further development is unlikely to occur on any significant scale
without planning and state-aid. But we should be clear that what we seek
to increase by planned develop"ment is not the production of any particular
year; but the 'average level of production'- above and below whkh the production of particular year fluctuates in response to seasonal conditions. Much
error and confusion will be avoided if this distinction is borne in mind more
firmly than it is at present. Let us use the term 'productivity' to refer to this
'average level of production', in order to emphasize the fact that we are not
referring to the producticm of particular years.

It i~ useful to ~o a step further and dot the i's md cros~ the t's of the
definition of 'productivity' so that it might become possible to measure it like
the birth rate or the death rate or similar useful statistical concepts. A difficulty
is presented by the fact that the same land is used in different seasons
(sometimes even simultaneously) to grow different crops. When we raise the
productivity of a plot of agricultural land, we can grow more rice or more jute,
more millets or more cotton- more or less as needed. Development of productivity is one thing, and the allocation of increased productivity to different
alternative uses is another. It is not unusual for people to imagine that productivity
has been increased when there is merely diversion from, say, short staple cotton
to millets or from mHlets to groundnuts. We cannot add up the weight of different
crops and arrive at a single total of the combined weight of all crops. So we
need a conventional method of establishing equivalence between different
crops in order to i:ll"rive at a single yardstick for the measurement of
productivity.
20.

192

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY : DEVELOPMENT TARGETS

Let us accept two conventions. First, - all foodgrains (when they are
clean, dry, dehusked and fit for human consumption) may be regarded as
equivalent to one another, maund for maund, and added up on that basis.
Secondly,- the productivity of any plot of agricultural land is the weight of the
average annual yield (less seed*) of foodgrains actually grown on such land ;
provided that where a crop other than a foodgrain is grown, it is assumed that
the foodgrains normally grown on such land or similar land in the vicinity
had been grown instead.
21. With the help of these conventions we may fix the present level of
~roductivity of agriculture in India as follows: We have already assumedt
the average yield (less &ced) of foodgrains cultivated in India (as an average of
five years preceding 1951) was 556 lakhs of tons. The gross area sown to
foodgrains is 78 per cent of the gross area sown to all crops. The total
productivity may therefore be assumed as [556 X 100/78, i.e.) 700 lakhs of
ANNUAL tons.
22. Seven hundred lakhs of ANNUAL tons round about 1951 is then our
starting point; when our total number was 36 crores. What is the level
of productivity needed round about 1981, when we expect our number to
have grown to 52 crores? Before we estimate this, however, we should take
note of the shortages which were present round about 1951.
The shortage of food grains has already been estimated. Round about
1951, the annual average was 34 lakhs of tons. There are known to be shortages of smaller order in other crops also. Let us, therefore, assume in round

figures lhal 750 lakhs of ANNUAL tons of agricultural productivity are required
in order to feed and clothe .36 crores of people oJ the cun-ent levels of consumption.
This is the same thing a8 saying 5 ANNUAL lOns are required for every 24 persons.
At this rate, we can compute what we shall need by way of agricultural productivity in 1961 when we shall be 41 crores; in 1971 when
we shall be 46 crores ; and in 1981 when we shall be 52 croresif we are to overcome existing shortages and maintain current levels oj consumption
without deterioration. The results are shown in TABLE lIon next page.

-It is very neceuary that seed should be deducted from the Jr081 yield (amona other reuOl1I) bec.Ule
the proportion of seed to gross yield is "very different for~di1ferel1t araiQ4.

tft. ~pter IV. para 6'H anc! -¥l"BNP"...y.

CHAPTER V ;

THE PROSPECT-1gB!
TABLE

II

Needed
agricultural
Population

Targetloj
ckvelopment of
agricultural

JWoductivity

JWoductifJity
(IN LAKHS OF
ANNUAL TONS)

Year

(IN CRORES)

(IN LAKHS OF
ANNUAL TONS)

196 1

41

85 0

150

1971

46

960

260

1981

52

1,080

380

23. As long as the popUlation grows, our agricultural productivity
must also grow. Our target for de'Oelopment is, therefore, a movz'ng target which
is indicated by the figures of the last column oj TABLE 1I. If we express these
figures as percentages of the level of productivity prevailing in India round
about 1951 (viz., 700 lakhs of ANNUAL tons), we may say that the increase
required is of the ordt'f' of 21 per cent before 1961, 37 per cent before 1971 and 54
per cent before 1981.
Let us recall the fact that we have taken care to avoid over-estimating
either the probable increase of numbers or the probable requirements of foodgrains per head of popUlation or the probable proportion of all crops to foodgrains*. The targets set out in TABLE II are, therefore, minimal estimates of
the scale and tempo of development which are essential if existing shortages
are to be overcome and if we are to supply the food and cloth needed by our
growing numbers out of the produce of our land. If our future rate of development of agricultural productivity falls short of these targets we must expect to
have less food and cloth to go round for all, or to have to import more foodgrains
or more cotton or both.
24. No one is likely to dispute these statements. In fact, everyone is
anxious to see that agricultural productivity is developed as rapidly as possible-.
The Central Government and all the State Governments are concentrating their
·The last mentioned point is especially important. The high proportion of foodgrains (especially
cereals) to all crops in our cultivation reflects the high proportion offoodgrains (especially cereals) in our diet.
Ifwe .1r~ to hwc m')rc vegetable oil and m:>re gh~e, more milk or butter-milk. more vegetables and fruits,
more sugar and spices in our food (and more (,f these 8rc badly needed if We 8re to have better nutrition)
we should increase the proportion of foodcrops other than foodgrains. At present we cannot do this
because any increase in such crops cannor be secured except or Ihe c, sr 0/ a more tnan commensurate loss 0/
cereals. which WI! cannot afford. The point should, however, be noted that the targets of development
Rpecifi~d in T;\~~I: J I are ",inimal in tne sense that ''''1 do rlor include provision for material jml'r""'~mel1t
of current nUlnllonal standard~.
"
'

194

ACRicULTURAL PRoimCTIViTY : DEVELOPMENT TARGEtS

energies on it. Our First Five Year Plan, it is well known, has placed the programmes needed for this development in the forefront. About 45 per cent
of the planned expenditure on all development schemes is earmarked for the
development of agriculture, irrigation and power. Funds necessary for these
purposes, it is agreed, are tv be made available on a very high priority. What
is not, however, equally clear is whether the schemes are sufficient to solve our
problem. Let us examine how far the schemes included in the Plan will take
us towards the attainment of the targets of TABLE II. How much will remain
to be provided by future Five Year Plans ?

25. The most reliable as well as the most durable of all the methods of
increasing agricultural productivity is to increase the irrigated area. This
involves construction of new irrigation works or improvement of existing irrigation works. It is well known that schemes for the development of irrigation
are placed in the forefront of all schemes for the development of agricultural
productivity in the First Five Year Plan. All are familar with the great multipurpose river valley projects, as well as numerous other irrigation projects
(major and minor) which are either under construction or arc about to be
undenaken. Though they are well known, it is to be doubted whether there is
a correct quantitative perception of the scale of the undertaking or realisation
of the fact that, in the literal sense of the phrase, it is altogether unprecedente of
in the history of the world.
To begin with, we are far too apt to imagine that our country is poorly
equipped with irrigaton, as compared with other countries of the world. From
this it is deduced that we have a much larger leeway to make up than other
COWltries. This is entirely wrong. We can have a correct idea of the immensity of the task which we have Wldertaken only if we realise the truth, which iswe have already gone very far in developing the use -of usable resources of
water, just as we have already gone very far in developing the use of usable
resources of land. Unfortunately, the true position calmot be established by
figures because it is very difficult to get hold of comparable statistics of irrigated area in different countries. Such figures as there are go to show that
India irrigates a higher proportion of its crops than the world as a whole and
that probably no other large country except China irrigates a higher proportion. In particular, the proportion of irrigated area to gross area sown is
much smaller in Europe or North America than in India. The relevant figures
for India, round about 1951, are given below.26.

India's cultivated land now measures 2,867 lakhs of acres. The gross area
sown is just over 3,244 lakhs of acres; the clifference being the area sown more
195

CltAPTER V: TlIE PRosmct-1:g8l:'

than once during the same year.

Out of 3,244lakhs of acres sown, the crops on
no less than 503 lakhs of acres are irrigated. The irrigated area is thus 15'5
per cent of the total area sown. The proprotion of irrigated area for different
zones is shown in the table below:
TABLE

12

27. We must have some idea
of the rate at which irrigation has
developed in the past if we are to
Zone
assess correctly the scale of the
effort we are making for the future.
North India
23'4
How many of the works which at
East India
present provide irrigation for 5
South India
West India
crores of acres antedate British rule
Central India
- we have no means of computing.
North-West India •
It is certain that some of them are
well over two thousand years
INDIA
old.
It is probable the greater
part of the present irrigated area bad been brought under irrigation long
before British rule. It is, however, characteristic of irrigation works that they
fall into disrepair and disuse in times of anarchy and misrule and get restored
and improved under conditions of settled administration. There is little
doubt that a good deal of restoration and improvement of this nature has taken
place during the last century. It is also certain that considerable development
has also occurred through the construction of private wells and other small
scale works undertaken by farmers themselves. Such development was also
fostered by the grant of loans and concessions in respect of land revenue and
rent. In addition to all this, it is a fact that very large areas were newly brought
under irrigation by major irrigation projectS constructed as public enterprises
within the last century.
Percentage of
irrigated area to
area sown·

We have got detailed and accurate informaton about this. It has been
reckoned that the total area irrigated by public works projects (for which capital
and revenue accounts have been maintained) is 291 lakhs of acres in undivided
India. Out of this, it is estimated that 142 lakhs of acres are in areas now in
PakisWl. The development of irrigation, within India in its p~esent limits,
was 14-9 lakbs of acres. It took roughly a century for this development to
-The area of cultivated land (or net area sown) should be distinguished from the total (or gross) area
sown. Similarly the area of irrigated land is distinguishable from tbe total area irri8llted. The most appropriate comparison is between the total area irrigated and the total area sown.

196

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY : DEVELOPMENT TARGETS

occur. The table below shows the break up of this total by zones andJperiods
of construction :
TABLE

13
(IN LAKHS OF ACRES)

Constructional period
I

Before

1891

1891-1920

1921-1940

32 'S

5' J

18'2

East India

5'1

7'0

South India

12,6

13'1

2-4

West India

0'7

T ·6

I'S

0'7

5'9

27'5

9' I

6'4

43'0

78 '4

36.6

34'4

149'4

Zone

North India

•

Central India
North-West India
INDIA

Total

f2' I

The figures indicate a fairly steady, but slowly diminishing, tempo of
construction. The marked inequalities of development in the different zones
should also be noted. One should not imagine this involves arbitrary preference
for some areas and neglect of others. North India, North-West India and
South India presented much better scope for profitable development than West
India and Central India. East India was better provided by nature with rainfall and soil moisture than other zones and was less in need of new works of irrigation.
28. We must not under-estimate the scale of the effort which the figures of
We can appreciate how large an undertalting it was, if
we compare this history of development with that of the United States of
America as indicated by the following passage from the report of the Hoover
Commission :
TABLE 13 stand for.

.. At the time, the great multi-purpose projects were inaugurated, the earlier
projects of irrigation had been largely completed and were furnishing water to
about 2,790,0CJ0 acres. In the 18 years since that time about 1,500,000 acres
of additional soil have been brought under irrigation with perhaps another
550,000 acres more benefiting indirectly from the water supplied by the
mUlti-purpose projects."

197

CHAPTER V:

THE PROSPECT-I981

1t ,is evident that .the develqpment of irrigation by the construction of large
scale public works projects was undertaken in India on a much larger scale
and carried out at a much faster pace than in the United States of America.

29. Now, z"t is scarcely credZ"ble but nevertheless true that the First Fz"ve
Year Plan includes major irri'gation projects which are calculated to bring more
area under new imgation than the entire area brought under new irri'gation by
all major irrigati'on projects which were constructed duri'n~ a century of Brz"tish
rule. The relevant figures are shown in the table below :
TABLE

14

Irrigated area under major projects.
(IN LAKHS OF ACRES)

,--_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _1>... _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - ,

Projects constructed
during
the last century

First
Five Year Plan
Projects

North India

55'8

1-9'5

East India

12' I

55'0

South India

28'1

IO'3

West India

3'8

10' 5

Central India

6·6

10'7

North-West India

43'0

54'9

149'4

160'9

Zone

INDIA

A complete specification of the individual projects, of which the planned

results are shown in the last column of this table, will be found in the ;papers
printed as ApPENDIX VI.

30. Judged in ,the light of the scale .and tempo of past development the
present undertaking appears to be so stupendous that it may well be asked
whether the planned results are not seriously over-estimated. There is no
reason to believe they are. It is true that no one can be absolutely certain of the
·These figures relate to irrigation bendits from these projects on co"",utian. The fiVe multi-purpose
pro;ec'lr- Ko,U. Kqyna, Chambal, Riband and 'Krishna Valley on which work has yet to be started and
.certain tube·well schemes in Uttar Pradesh which would be completed in 1966-67. are exclUded.

·rl;98

Development of Irrigation -

Major Projects

DEVELOPMENT OF IRRIGATION
MAJOR IRRIGATION PROJECTS
n
17,OoOr-------------------------------------

I

Trend of Acrea_ge of New Irrigation of Mt?)or
IrrigatIon pr[Jjecfs in India.

New Irri9ofion by preiecfs
consfruefed In Incite and
Pal(lslan dur;n.!!lhe
cenfur.!l prececltn!l 1940
comparea' will! pre/eels
included /n Ihe Firsl
Fipe - Year Plan fOr India.

16~OOOr---------------------------~~~--~

I~OOIOr---------------------------

III

~IO.IJOIDr-------------------------­

«

III
::J

o

:I
t-

Z 8.U\JUt-BEFORE 1891 _______________
III

1/1

::r
x
<
.J

LIJ

0:
I.)

«

z
III
IiJ

tr

o

«

MA.JOR IRRIGATION PRO.JECTS\
CONSTRUCTED.

•

J

TREND OF FINANCIAL RETURNS

Accumulafed'surplus Revenue less Accumulated

Net Revenue Returns

interest arrears (Lald.,s)

8·

4,,000

l1)

w

cr
~
I-

Z 6·

en

UJ

3,,000

X

t)

:.::

n:.
III

<C

0.

.J

Z
- 2,,000

4·

en
LLI

UJ
0-

:J

a::
Zo·

1,,000

NAJOFl IRRIIiATION PROJECTS
CONSTRUCTED.

I,OOO~------------------~

OURING
19ZI-1940

2poo~--------------------------~
MAJOR IRRIGATION PRO.JE'CTS
CONSTRUCTED.

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY : DEVELOPMENT TARGETS

results of any undertaking until one has got them. But there is no justification
for misgivings, because planning of major irrigation projects is not a new task.
The engineers of North-West India, North India and South India have got
nearly a century of experience to.go upon. The projectli may indeed take somewhat lQnger to complete than eager people may desire. The people may take
time to adapt the land under these projects to irrigated cultivation. Even after
irrigation starts, it may take a little time before the yield increases to the normal
level of irrigated crops. Experience shows that we must be prepared for all this.
But, there need. be little doubt that the availability of water would have been
correctly estimated and the planned extension of i17i'gated area Wf,'ll, t'n jact, take
place.
31. Now, it may be a"lked if all this is now possible, why was it not attempted before? It is necessary that we should ask this question explicitly and
make sure that we have answered it correctly. The right answer is to be
found in the relation between costs and results. An analysis of costs and results
of the old major irrigation projects and the major development plan projects
under the First Five Year Plan is made in a note printed as Part B of
APl)ENDIX VI. The main conclusions are as follows: In the old days, the selection
of projects for execution was limited by the consideration that the net revenue
return should suffice to render the enterprise a profitable undertaking for the
s.tate. [T~re were well-recognised exceptions to the rule, but they were limited.] We have discarded this limitation, and hence the large scope for development which we are now using up. It is necessary, however, to face the fact that,
with every new advance made in the utilisation of usable water supplies, the
real cost (and not merely the money cost) of new works necessary for making
a further advance has been increasing. The figures make it quite clear that the
'law of diminishing r.elurns' i8 in effective operation and that every acre of new
.irrigation has lO be subsidt'sed by the general tax-payer. The diagrams which
precede this page illustrate clearly the enormous scale of the development which
we have und~rta}{~n, as well as the trend of diminishing returns against which we
have to contend. This situation is not peculiar to India. It exists in the United
States of America also"'. India is distinguishable from United States only in
tl\~ fact that here the need for an uphHl struggle to get water for irrigation, even at
~tO$S,. is very II)1.\,b more urgent and imperative.
32 . What is the probable increase of agricultural productivity to be expected when, as planned, these projects are completed and r61 lakhs of acres are
brought Wlder irrigation? The detailed data necessary for making a firm estimate
.01 Al'PBNDtx V, Part B.

199

CHAPTER V:

THE PROSPECT-1gB I

do not seem to be available. From the published papers itlmay be concluded
that the schemes postulate an increase, in terms of foodgrains, of about two
ANNUAL tons for every 9 acres of new irrigation. This means an increase of
agricultural productivity of the order of 361akh.c; of ANNUAL tons. It should be
mentioned here that we are dealing with the results to be expected, when aU
t he major irrigation projects jnc1uded in the First Five Year Plan are completed
and the anticipated new irrigation is developed fully. This is not the same as the
area likely to be brought under irrigation within the period covered by the First
Five Year Plan. As we are not limiting our review to the next two or three
years only, we may assume that the planned increase will be forthcoming in
gradual instalments year by year, and will be substantially completed before
1961. According to TABLE II, we shall then need 150 lakhs of ANNUAL tons in
order to overcome current shortages and keep pace with the growth of population. The contribution secured from all the major irri'garion projects w£ll fall slwrt

of one{ourth of the total needed. If the scale of our effort is unprecedented, ehe
magnitude of our growing need is even more unprecedented.
33. But major irrigation projects do not exhaust the provision made for
irrigation in the First Five Year Plan. There are 'minor irrigation' schemes
also. The name is rather deceptive, because the schemes in question are by
no means of minor importance. As a matter of fact we shall have to secure an
even larger increase of productivity from such schemes than from major irrigation projects*. Minor irrigation works are of many different types- dams,
channels, ordinary wells, tube-wells (other than those included in major irrigation projects), tanks and pumping installations. They include public works
to be constructed and maintained by State Governments, 8..<; well as privateworks, which cultivators are to be subsidised and helped to undertake. The
schemes of various State Governments added up to a programme designed to
yield about 83 lakhs of acres of new irrigation. As this was found to be
insufficient (alongw;th other measures) to attain immediate future requirements,
supplementary provision has been made by the Planning Commission which
calls for another 30 lakhs of acres of new irrigation, at an extra cost of 30
crores.
Altogether, the minor irrigation programme is designed to increase the
irrigated area by 113 lakhs of acres- which is between one~fifth and one-fourth
of the total area under irrigation in the country.

·This doe. not moan that minor irrigation can be a substiudll for major irription. We thaQ He
presently that their co_bined output will not b. cnou&h.

200

AGtucULnhut PRODUCTiVITY : D:tiVEioPMENT TARGEts
TABLB

15
FIRST FIVE YEAR PLAN

Minor Irrigalion Programme
Unit cost of minor irrigation
Area of new irrigation

developments

Zone

(IN LAKHS OF A.CRES)

Rs. as.

North India

II'I

43 4

East India

42'3

31

South India

7,6

°
186 14

West India

8'0

104 12

Central India

5'2

121 15

8·6

15 10

82'8

60 4

3°'0

100

North-West India.

ALL STA.TES
Supplementary (Zonally unspecified)

--

°

The figures call for the following comments

Firsl,- They include, as mentioned already, small scale works to be undertaken
as public works and other works to be undertaken by cultivators with

the help of loans, grants and technical a~sistance. As the figures are not
separated, it is difficult to assess the prospects of realisation of the programme within the time and at the unit costs specified;
Secondly,- In so far as they are public work~ undertaken by State Governments which possess staff experienced in this type of work, it is likely
that planning and organisation are sufficiently well-advanced and the
programme would be carried out. Not all State Governments, however, are equally well-equipped with staff possessing the necessary
technical qualifications and experience; and
Thirdly,- The schemes which visualise an offer of financial and other assistance being made by the State Governments in order to stimulate cultivators to sink wells in their holdings or construct dams, or improve dams,
channels, embankments, ponds, etc., are of very great importance. But
the arrangements necessary for putting such programmes through are
not easy. Some State Governments have. inherited a strong enough
machinery of administration from the past. They have acquired experience (during several years of 'Grow More Food' effort), in the organisation of the administration of such programmes. Many other states lack
2.01

CHAPTER V:

TIiE PROSPEct-:t~:t

these advantages. Unless, however, these arrangements are perfected
and efficiently operated in such states also, it may not be possible to
spend the money provided or money may be spent without securing an
equivalent jncrease of productivity. That is one important consideration.
There is another. No scheme ofsubsidisation of private works will succeed
unless the subsidy was carefully adjusted. If the subsidy is lavishly
given, the development of productivity will be too small in relation to
the expenditure; and progress will be too slow and too costly. If, on
the other hand, the subsidy is not clearly adequate, it will fail to induce
<.:ultivators to undertake improvements. The subsidy must be sufficient
to reduce the net investment by the cultivator to a level at which he
could be assured of a profitable return. As large numbers of cultivators
have already been induced by loans and subsidies to carry out such
works during the last few years, it should be possible to settle- in the
light of expcrience- which is the right subsidy to be offered. It would
be surprising if the requirements turned out to be smaller than the
average rate of Rs. 100 per acre provided by the Planning Commission.
The cost figures of at least two zones- where much smaller figures
are provided~ would seem to call for upward revision, if the indicated .
targets are to be attained.
34. This programme, it has been reckoned in the report 011 the First Five
Year Plan, is calculated to increase productivity by 24 lakhs of ANNUAL tons.
From what has been said above, it seems reasonable to conclude that the chances
of the entire programme being implemented within the next two or three years
are poor. More time will be ~ccessary; and, very probably, more money also.
Experience must show the practicable rate of progress and necessry cost. The
rate of progress can, indeed, be rapid if adequate administrative, financial and
technical arrangements are perfected and the cultivators are properly organised
to cooperate with one another ana with the local officers of Government. How
to bring about such organisation is a question which admits of no simple or
ready-made answer. It is known, however, that active steps are being taken to
find the answer and perfect the arrangements. For our present purposes, we
may, therefore, assume that the two parts of the programme of irrigation development- major irrigation projects at present estimated to cost 445 crores and minor
irrigation schemes at present estimated to cost 77 crores- will be put through;
and that they will yield, in reasonable time, an increased agricultural productivity
of the order of (36+24, i.e.,) 60 lakhs of ANNUAL tons. When we have got it,

where shall we be?
by 1961.
2.02

We shall have secured just about tflJo-fifths of what roe nud

AGRICULTU1tAL P1tOBUCTIVITY : DEVELOPMENT TARGETS

35. Irrigation, of course, is not the only means of increasing yields.
There is 'fertilisation'- the effort to increase the supply of mineral fertilisers as
well as organic fertilisers and green manure. This effort merges in the various
measures by which cultural practices are improved- the use of the right seed,
proper preparation of the seed- bed and care of the seedling, the protection of the
Lastly, there are arrangements for
growing plant against pests and diseases, etc.
reclaiming waste land as well as land which has gone out of cultivation owing to
the growth of deep-rooted weeds. The latter is closely linked to development of
the use of tractors. There is no doubt that every one of these different types of
schemes will contribute something towards the attainment of our target. But
how much would that contribution be and when shall we get it? In attempting to answer this question, we enter the arena of high debate- for we deal,
mostly, in opinion. There are few reliable statistics based on adequate
experience in the country. We have, instead, varying moods of optimism
and pessimism.
Data regarding responses to the use of mineral fertilisers are coming in, in
recent years, and we are perhaps already in sight of a firm basis for quantitative
assessments. .Even then, we should pass beyond the purely technical relationship between quantities of fertilisers and quantities of additional yield. We
should count the cost- as we have done about irrigation. We should take
account of the arrangements necessary for ensuring that the fertilisers are
distributed at a price at which it will be remunerative for the cultivators to use
them on the production offoodgrains. Here again, we should face the fact that
we are probably up against the impossibility of progress without subsidisation.
When we turn from mineral fertilisers to all other measures for the improvement of cultural practices, it is extremely diffk."'Ult to achieve a realistic and
measurable basis such as we need when we are dealing with the vitally important
issue of assessing the prospects of food supply of the people.

36. The rest of this section is devoted to a purely subjective assessment,
by the present writer, of the prospect for increase of agricultural prodllctivity.
The assessment is not based on any statistical projection of 'natural' growth ;
for we may be sure it would be very small- probably negligible. It is assumed
that the preponderant part, if not the whole, of future development will be secured
as a result of public works which will not be fully self-financing, as well as by
state-aided an:l state-subsidised private effort on· a nation-wide scale. On this
basis, the question is not merely. what is technologically feasible (though that
is very important), but also how much unremunerative outlay [md how much
~\l.bsidr are invo~ved. The idea that development can be achieved without
~j

CHAPTER V:

THE PROSPECT-1981

COWlting the cost is Wlpractical. Concentration on subsidised development of
agricultural productivity will involve a co~ponding retardation of the effort
to improve communications, housing, hygiene, health, education and the amenities of life. There are limits to the extent to which such developments can be
retarded without creating so much disappointment and discontent as to
prejudice the success of the whole conception of planned development.
37. Our present level of gross area sown (reckoning the double-crop area
more than once) is 32 crores. What is it likely to be in 1981? It is suggested
that 35 crores is probably about the limit. We have found, in Chapter I, good
reasons for believing that India has already brought under cultivation an
exceptionally large proportion of usable land. It is common knowledge that
over very large areas, land which should have been reserved for use as woodland or pasture has been brought under the plough. In a great many villagt!S
we shall indeed need Q carefully organised survey of waste lands, in order to
localire all the areas which it would still be possible to reclaim and bring under
cultivation without excessive subsidisation. In the course of such suroey we shall
have to ascertain the different forms of state-aid necessary for bringing them under
cultivation. It would, however, be unjustified optimism to imagine that very
latge areas of land which would yield a return commensurate with the labour
of cultivation- even after subsidised reclamation - will be found very quickly.
Progress in this respect, will be both small and slow.
It is possible to increase crop-acreages, without extension of cultivation to
waste land, if we can increase double-cropping. Here again we already have
a very large proportion under dOUble-cropping. The duration of soil moisture
is the principal limiting factor and it is doubtful whether there can be much
increase, except pari passu with the growth of irrigation- especially irrigation
under private wells.

The assumption that the crop-acreage under both heads can be increased by
3 crores of acres before 1981 is probably optimistic, but not perhaps un;ustifiably so. Let us make it. What would be the resultant increase of productivity? We should assume a rate res presenting the average of the lower range
of yields of unirrigated crops at current standards of husbandry. It is necessary
to do this, because estimates of increased productivity consequent on irrigation
or other measures for increasing ~he yield rate per acre should be made separately
and no item should be counted twice. On this basis) estimate of increase by
one ANNUAl. ton on every 8 acres newly added to our crop-acreage would perhaps err on the side of optimism. Let us assume it ; and count an increase of
agricultural productivity of the or4er of 40 lakhs of ANNU"~ tQ~1
~4

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY : DEVELOPMENT TARGETS

38. We have reviewed the facts and figures about irrigation at considerable length. We have now got 5 crores of acres of irrigated crops. How many
acres of irrigated crops shall we have in 1981? The First Five Year Plan
budgets for an increase of irrigated area of the order of 2 • 8 crores of acres. The
budgeted increase is certainly feasible, though not within the time. There will
also, no doubt, be scope for further increases. Let us take a long-term view,
in the full knowledge that every lakh of acres newly added to the irrigated area
will render the addition of another lakh more difficult and more costly. What
shall we assume as the final result of this uphill struggle- 4 crores of acres ?
Shall we succeed in increasing the irrigated area of about 5 crores of acres (built
up during some thousands ofyears)- by about 80 per cent- to about 9 crores
within the next thirty years. Let us assume that we set this long-term target
for ourselves and attain it, through a succession of Five Year Plans. What
would be the result? If we attribute to irrigation the difference between the
average yield of irrigated crops and the average yield of un irrigated crops- we
would be justified in taking credit for one ANNUAL ton fOT every five new acres
of irrigation*. [In this, we do not take credit for better manuring or other
improvement of cultural practices. This comes later.] We shall get a total
increase of productivity of the order of 80 lakh ANNUAL tons by irrigation. Let us
add this to the result of increasing crop-acreage, already mentioned. We shall
get increased productivity of the order of 120 lakhs of ANNUAL tons.
39. Let us now take into account all other methods of increasing the
yield per acre- mineral fertilisers ; green manuring; better rotations calculated to improve soH fertility; the so-called Japanese method of rice cultivaton ;
improved seeds (already known) ; improved seeds which may be expected
to be thrown up by research within the next ten years; contour-bunding
and dry-farming; better protection against pests and diseases; and greater
care and attention to all the processes of cultivation. Everyone of these measures
will undoubtedly help. We should count on them- but we should not count on
them indefinitely. In particular, we should refrain from making a double count
of the results attributable to irrigation and to manures- once separately, and
once again when assessing the value of particular methods of improving yields
per acre. We should steer clear of a common mistake wJ,.ich clmSists in

confusing these imprO'Vements of methods of cultivation which enable us to secure
the same yield per acre with less labour, with others which help to increase
the yield per acre. The former (however beneficial) are not relevant to
the present discussion.

Finally, there is the tendency to attribute increased

·If land is reclaimed Crom waste and is also brought under irrigation~ we ~ssUll\e 1/8tl\ of a ~o[\ pe~
acre on.rcclamation and I/stlt of a ton per acre in addition an irripton.

CHAPTER V:

THE PROSPECT-lgBI

yields to changes in the system of ownership and management of land. What
sort of land reform is calculated to improve farming efficiency is a question on
which diverse views are (and will continue to be) held. But we should be
careful to distinguish between efficiency in the realisation of technologicial
possibilities which otherwise exist, and the creation of new possibilities. No
measures of land reform will add to the teclmological possibilities of cultivation.
Well..:conceived reforms will remove impediments to their realisation ; illconceived changes will create new impediments. Let us not put 'co-operative
fanning" 'collectivization', 'redistribution of land' and so forth in the same
category as water, manures, and improved seed and add up targets of increases
attributed to each of them separately. The upshot of all the genuine possibilities which do certainly exist cannot (in the opinion of the present writer) be
put higher than the combined effect of the two targets already mentioned- i. e.,
12.olakhs of ANNUAL tons. The scale of effort needed to secure this result may be
indicated by the break up of the total into three equal parts as shown below:
Firsl,- Forty lakhs of ANNUAL tons to be secured by concentrating the use
of mineral fertilisers (whose use can be stepped up considerably with
advantage) improved seeds and improved cultural methods from
about 2 crores of acres of land having an assured supply of water ;
Secondly,- Forty lakhs of ANNUAL tons to be secured in the same way as
above but without the concentrated use of mineral fertilisers, from
about 4 crores of acres of land having a reasonably satisfactory supply
of water ; and
Thi'rdly,- Farty lakhs of ANNUAL tons to be secured by better cultivation
of about 8 crores of acres of unirrigated land situated in areas with
low rainfall. This is the most conjectural item, because known methods
(e.g.) contour-bunding and dry fanning) might not suffice for this
purpose. On the other hand, if intensive research could give us some
improved seed similar to the 'hybrid com' of America, the proposed
programme may be over-fulfilled.

40. At the end of all this, our estimate 01 mcrease of agricultural productiVIty is still only 240 lakhs of ANNUAL tons; of which one-sixth is to be
secured by increase of acreage under crop; one-third by increase of acreage under
irrigation ; and one-half by all methods of increasing yield per acre other than
irrigation. This increase will fall short of our needs before 1971. It will be just
about sufficient to overcome the present shortages and meet our growing needs
Imtil our number reached 45 crores- which will occur rOWld about 1969.
By that time we shall have completed three successive Five~ Year Plans,

2®

IMPROVIDENT MATERNITY : REDUCTIo!( TARGETS

each more difficult than its predeamor, and embarked on the fourth. If even
then, our population is still growing unchecked, what are the prospects of our
being able to continue to force the development of agricultural ptoduCti\TJtY so as
to keep pace with it. Of course, there will never be a point of time at which it
can be said that tbe last improvement has been effected. But if we draw the
moral correctly from the many unmistakable signs which go to sh(J'W that the law
of diminishing returns is in effective operation, we should make up our mind
to face the fact that our effort to keep pace with unchecked grOfOth of populca{on
is bound to fail at some point. If the analysis of the subject contained in tbis
chapter is even approximately valid, we should be able to go one 8tep further
andfix this point by saying that it is the time at which our total number reaches and

passes 4tJlcrores.

C -

Improvident Maternity : reduction targets

us ACCEPT the position that we shall not be able to overcome our
existing shortages and also in addition keep pace with the unchecked growth of
population. Then, what follows- that food shortage will grow and grow until it
ends in a breakdown of food distribution and return of famine and pestilence ?
That is indeed a dark prospect which 1943 warns us to face as a possibility.
But not all events which are possible are probable, and very few are inevitable.
After all, we have been failing to keep pace with the growth of population for about
thirty years and the life of the people is still being carried on, though not without
visible adverse results. We must study the trend of these results in the past,
in ordet to have a realistic idea of what to expect in futute.
LBT

42. First, it is certain that if agricultural productivity fails to keep pace with
the growth of population, our need for imported foodgrains will incrense steadily.
We may do with a little less in a year following a good monsoon, and need a
little more in a year following a bad one ; but there is a norm above and below
which these fluctuations· take place. It is this DOrm which has 8teadily increased
during the past 30 years ; and it is certain to go up in the future also, \lllless the
development of productivity keeps pace with the growth of population. Round
about 1951, we reckoned that the average shortage offoodgraitls required to be
·In:identally, tn:se y~ It to year ll~=tUltioIl9 in import needs win be only a Craction ohbc year to year
ll",ctulltiODS of productioQ.

CHAPtER V:

THE PIWSl'ECt-IgSI

their exportable surpluses tend to become less abundant. • Food importing
countries tend to increase, as also the quantities they need to buy. In these
circumstances, food importing countries should, in their own interests,
limit their demands volunta..tily, co-operate in buying available supplies
at fair prices and sharing them equitably according to need. If instead of
doing this, they adopt the policy mentioned above, 'Vi!., to force the exports
of industrial products and rely on the purchasing power thus acquired in
order to back steadily increasing demands for food, they would only succeed
in injuring themselves. The supplies available for international distribution will remain much the same ; the price of food will go up and increasing
quantities of industrial products will have to be sold in order to procure the same
amount of food. Available supplies will be distributed unfairly and the industrially weakest will go to the wall, however urgent their need. These results arc
bound to follow unless the food exporting countries of the world increase agricultural productivity at a faster rate than their own rate of growth of popUlation

and produce increasing surpluses to match increasing def£cits in India and Europe.
This will not happen. It follows that industrialisation is not the answer
to the food problem ; the widespread belief to the contrary is a fallacy.
based on a misreading of history.

This does not mean that development of industry is unnecessary or
unimportant. Far from it. But, we should be clear about why we need it. W
need it, in order to provide ourselves with those goods and services which add
to the comforts and conveniences of life and to make ljfe and work less laborious.
Industrialisation will not help to solve our food problem, except indirectly to a
limited extent in so far as it can provide the materials needed for the development of agricultural productivity.

45. So then, we have reached two conclusions. One is : that we cannot
grow as much food as we shall need, if we go on increasing in numbers as we
do. The other is : that ifwe do not grow more food, we must eat less food.
What follows- that starvation is our lot? No. It follows that we should
make up our mind that we shall not go on increasing in numbers as we do. We
should realise that it is improvident on our part to permit ourselves to increase
in numbers indefinitely without taking thought of how our children and our
children's children are to live; and we should resolve to put an end to this
increase as soon as possible.
• Relevant data OD this phenomena will be found in ,ApPllNDlX V. The posilion i8 unmistakab1e abour
rice. 'fhoup it is somewhat Ie.. difficult in recent years'about wheat, the drift is in the 8ame direction.
~lO

IMPIWVIDENT MAtERNITY : REOUCTION TAn GETS

46. This is all very well. We may resolve on what we please. That is
easy enough. But can this resolve be put into execution ? Is it possible to
bring about a substantial reduction of the rate of growth of our numbers- let
alone a complete stoppage of increase- sufficiently quickly to make a material
difference to the prospect for 1981 (which is what we are considering) ?
The last section was devoted to an exposition of the implications of the
effort to raise agricultural productivity at a fast enough rate so as to keep pace
with the unchecked growth of population. The conclusion was reached that
even with the best efforts we would probably succeed in increasing productivity only by about one-third of the present level ; whereas it is necessary that
the increase should be in excess of one-half of the present level, if we are to
succeed in 'keeping pace'. That was why we reached the conclusion that
the effort to 'keep pace' with unchecked growth of population until 1981 was
impracticable. How do we know that the effort to limit births and arrest the
growth of population is any less impracticable? That is the crucial question
we have to answer. Before answering it, let us note and briefly dispose of a few
other aspects of this highly contentious subject.
47. In recent years, the population problem is debated in almost all countries
of the world and very varying views are held. First, there are those who hold
that the practice of contraception is sinful. A sinful thing could not be necessary
or desirable or other than harmful in every way. Therefore, they feel it their
duty to prevent the spread of this practice. As, however, few people are now-adays willing to accept prohibitions without explanation, they proceed to explain
that the growth of population presents no problem at all or that the problem
can be solved in many difl"erent ways which will not involve the use of contraception. It would be a mistake to under-estimate the force of this taboo. This force
does not depend on the soundness of the reasons adduced in support of it; but
on the respect which is justly due to religion generally, and to the opinion of all
people who are manifestly sincere and disinterested. If we recall the fact that,
only recently, the World Health Organisation felt compelled tc ,void even considering this subject, we must count it a fortunate circum· .": 'lce that the
religious faith of most of our people is not bound up with thi: .:' ~')(J It is,
therefore, easier for us- while affirming due respect for religion, l;-Izln~ljl~: and the
integrity of family life- to insist that the question whether cOlltr,]':,": ,~ii'i..l is good
or bad for the people shall be considered in the light ofuninrubited l;,;,:':on.

48. Secondly, there are those who arc quite convinced of th! complete
absence of any necessity for any effort to restrain the growth of popUlation:
the population may grow to any extent- it is always possible to organise their
211

CHAPTER V:

THE PROSPECT-1gB1

activities in such a wayac; to produce the food and all other goods and services
needed for an ever-rising standard of living for all of them. To them, it is
unnecessary that there should be enough land ; the secret of managing with less
and less land per capita is simple- collectivize it! But how can we get the same
amount offood from less and less land even if the land were to be collectivized?
We are told that we may safely leave this to science. It is, it seems, an observed fact that those people who make full use of science develop technology at a
faster rate than the growth of population. Collectivization of land plus technology
means adequate food for all the people- no matter what the quantitative relation
may be between the land and the people. That is the belief. It is not so much
a bLlliof in science as sciencolatry. This new religion comes in handy for a
school of thought, which is on principle, opposed to admitting that the
shortage of land could be an operative cause of poverty at any time. For if
it can be operative in future, it might be operative already. If this belief gains
ground, it would weaken a political and economic doctrine which attributes
the hardships of the poor exclusively to the wickedness of the less poor. And
no opinion which has such an effect can be truc. Most people, however, do not
reason this out at all. They are concerned with the result- all people should
get all the food they need. This is happening in other countries; and they are
determined that it must happen in India also. Since science does seem to work
wonders in so many other ways, why should it fail in this purpose? To such
people, the answer must be : "Yes, you are right. But, if you believe in science,
you must believe in it fully. Science has placed in your hands the means ot
reducing births, just as much as of reducing deaths or of increasing the yield of
crops. You should use all of them equally well. You should not combine a
scientific approach to agriculture, hygiene and medicine with an unscientific
approach to contraception."

49. Thirdly, there are those who agree that the growth of populat:on should
be checked; but maintain that there is no need for the Government to mix
themselves up too prominently in such a delicate and controversial matter. All
that the Government need do, according to this view, is to concentrate on improving the standard of living of the people. When we attain West European
standards of living we shall also have West European birth rates. Some say
the reduction of the birth rate will come about by the people adopting contraception of their own accord in order to preserve their high standards of living.
Others say that high standards of living (especially an adequate supply of protein food) will induce physiological changes which will bring about a reduction
in the number of children born, even without the practice of contraception.
Anyway, both schools agree that when the Government have solv~d" th~
212

IMPROVIDENT· MATERNITY : ·REDUCtiON TARGEtS

problem, the people will see to it that the problem stays solved and does not
reappear. That is, no doubt, comforting. But what is to happen if it is true
that you cannot solve the problem unless you have checked the growth of
population beforehand ?
50. That brings us back to the crucial question of practicability, still to be
answered: Which is more difficult- checking the growth of populatioQ or
keeping pace with the unchecked growth of population? Obviously, the
answer is bound up with the state of public opinion on the subject.
It was nearly 37 years ago when Shri P. K. WATIAL, the pioneer of Indian
thought on this subject, published his luminous essay "The Population Problem
in India - a Census Study". At that time he likened his effort to uthe intrusions on the peace of mind of an occupied and self-satisfied public by faddists
who put up their umbrellas and insist that it is raining when every good man of
the world knows' that the sun is shining". He judged the mood of the public
aright.
Since then many able writers, scholars, scientists, economists and men of
religion have carried on the debate- while the world and India were changing
rapidly) and the problem grew and became visible to the naked eye. Within
the last few. years, public intcrest has grown enormously. There is widespread
and continuous discussion in the press, the platform and among social workers.
At the same time, the practice of contraception is beginning to take root among
wide sections of the urban intelligentia- the people who are hardest hit by
recent economic changes.

This movement of public opinion has now acquired coherence, crystallisation
and a sense of direction with the publication, by the Planning Commission, oj its
report on the First Five Year Plan.
51. The views expressed by the Planning Commission are extracted bclow :
"The recent increase in the population of India nnd the pressure exercised
on the limited resources of the country have brought to the forefront the urgency
of the problem of family planning and population control. The application
of medical knowledge and social care has lowered thc death-ratc, while the birthratc rem3ins fairly constant. This has led to the rapid increase in the growth
of population. While a lowering of the birth-rate may occur as a result of
improvements in the standards of living, such improvements are not likely to
materialise if there is a concurrent increase of population. It is, therefore,
apparent that population control can be achieved only by the reduction of the
birth-rate to the extent necessary to stabjIize the population at a level consistent
with the requirements of national economy. This can be secured only by the
·realisation of the nccd for family limitation on a wide scale by the people. The
main appeal for family planning is based on considerations of the health and
.. .,."...
21)

CHAPtER V:

THE PROSPECT-1gBI

welfare of the family. Family limitation or spacing of the children is necessary
and desirable in order to secure better health for the mother and better care
and upbringing of children. Measures directed to this end should, therefore,
form part of the public health programme.
"All progress in this field depends, first, on creating a sufficiently strong
motivation in favour of family planning in the minds of the people and, next,
on providing the necessary advice and service based on acceptable, effiCient,
harmless and economic methods. But these presuppose (J) intensive studies
about the attitudes and motivations affecting family size and techniques and
procedures for the education of the public on family planning, and (2) field
experiments on different methods of family planning as well as medical and
technical research.

ccA programme for family limitation and population cont~ol should :
(a) obtain an accurate picture of the factors contributing to the rapid popUla-

tion increase in India;
(b) discover suitable techniques of family planning and devise methods
by which knowledge of these techniques can be widely disseminated;
and
(c) make advice; on family planning, an integral part of the service of
Government hospitals and public health agencies.
"A sum of Rs. 65lakhs has been allocated by the Central Government
in the Plan, to the Ministry of Health for a family phUUling programme.
"This programme includes :
(I) The provision, in Government hospitals and health centres, of advice
on methods of family planning for married persons who require
such advice: Medical Officers working at hospitals and health centres
like maternity and child welfare clinics should give advice to women
regarding family planning when such advice is necessary for health
reasons. If a doctor feels that a woman patient cannot undergo again
the strain of pregnancy and partUrition without danger to health,
it is obviously the duty of the doctor to give such advice as is necessary
to enable the person to prevent conception. In these circumstances,
the doctor would be justified in suggesting any chemical, mechanical
or biological methods of oontraception or sterilization 8S may be
indicated for the individual case. The giving of advice on birth
control has been a procedure allowed by the Ministry of Health in
U.K. in medical centres maintained by the local authorities.
(2) Field experiments on different methods of family planning for the

purpose of determining their suitability, acceptability and effectiveness
in different sections of the population: Ifit can be demonstrated that our
people, particularly those living in rural areas, can be educated to accept
the rhythm method and use it as a practical method of limiting
family growth, Governmental support should be extended to the propagtltion of this method. From the point of view of avoiding enonnous

lMplWVIOENT MATERNITY : REOUCtION TARGETS
expenditure as well as that of securing the ethical values that
community life would gain by the self-imposed restraint which the
rhythm method involves, it would seem desirable to try out
this method fully and thus ascertain hs practicability. Whether the
rhythm method is capable of wide application in the community with
adequate results Or not, actual experimentation alone can tell.
Research and experiments need not however be confined to a single
method. There are numerous voluntary agencies which are currently
propagating the spread of information on family planning and the
use of chemical and mechanical contraceptives. Their activities
would need support.
(3) Development of suitable procedures to educate the people on family
planning methods: Inexpensive means of rapidly educating the
public in matters relating to family size wiH have to be evolved if
large-scale reduction in the national birth-rate is to be obtained.
Scientific tec1miques are available to assess the effect of mass educational campaigns. These techniques should be used to develop
educational programmes suitable for the different economic and social
sections of the population.
(4) Collection, from representative sections of the population, of infonnation on reproductive patterns, and on attitudes and motivations affecting the size of the family: The reproductive pattern in any popUlation
is largely determined by social and cultural factors which may differ
from one area to another. A thorough investigation of the differences
in attitudes and motivations towards family size and of the factors
responsible for producing such differences is important. Research
along these lines is necessary if we arc to understand the particular
sentiments and aspirations to which programmes offamily limitation in
various sections of the population should appeal.

(5) Study of the inter-relationships between economic, social and population
changes : The information obtained by such studies will form the
necessary background for the formulation of a national population
policy and the development of appropriate measures for population
planning based on factual information.
(6) Collecting and studying information about different methods of family
planning (based on scientifically tested experience in India and abroad)
and making such information available to professional workers.

(7) Research into the physiological and medical aspects of human fertility
and its control.
C'It is considered that the problems of popUlation and family planning

may be divided into those relating [0 :
. I.
2.

Policy and approacb, and

Research and progr&mme6.

2IS

CHAPTER V ~

THE PROSPECT-1gB I

Two committees have accordingly been constituted. It would also appear
desirable to set up at a later date a population commission to assess the population
problem, consider different views held on the subject of population control,
appraise the results of experimental studies and recommend measures in the
field of family planning to be adopted by the Government and the people".

52. That is as far as we have reached today in the evolution of public
opinion about this highly contentious subject. Conflicting voices are still heard,
but the ultimate outcome of the debate is no longer in much doubt. People
are coming to heliCfJe that population control is necessary and that it is unlikely

to come ahout quickly enough unless Government took some steps to bring it
about. That is a great advance. But we are not yet sure how we are going to set
about the task of inducing the people to limit births. It seems so visionaryalmost unreal- when we think about the villages which are five-sixths of
the problem. We are also not very clear in our mind how much time we
have in this matter. Perhaps limitation of births is merely a desirable thing
to be achieved in due time when it becomes practicable. Or is it something
about which it is essential in the national interest that definite results of a
measurable character should be achieved within a specified time? We do
not know; we are not sure. We have not yet reached the point at which
consideration of targets and priorities can be placed on the agenda. But we
must look ahead- as far ahead as I98I- and consider targets and priorities.
Otherwise, the efforts of Government will prove to be inadequate and halfhearted. The great advance already made in the evolution of public opinion
may fail to take us anywhere.
53. Our appraisal of the possibilities of development of agricultural
productivity has led us to the conclusion that it might be possible to achieve
an overall increase of agricultural productivity by about one-third of its present
level- and this would correspond to the needs of a total population strength
of 45 crores. This may be reached sometime round about I969. That would
give us a maximum of about I5 years for planned measures to limit births, to
become effective and yield results. It is not a very long period for such a large
enterprise; but it cannot also be said to be far too short. Let us then define
our general aim to be: so to limit the number of births that they do not materially

exceed the number of deaths and thus achieve a substantially stationary population
before our number exceeds 45 crores. That would be the first step towards a
crystallisation of ideas on targets and priorities.
54. Though the objective as thus defined is clear enough, it will serve
the purpose of indicating the needed practical measures much better, if it can
218

IMPROVIDENT MATERNITY : REDUCTION TARGETS

be put in a form in which every one may perceive his or her own share of the
collective obligation. It is in this context that the conception of ' improvident
maternity', which was touched upon in an earlier chapter, acquires practical
importance. The birth rate is something for which respo~ibility can be
fastened on no one. But the number of births which occur to a married couple
"are, ex hypothesi, controllable by them. Is it possible to specify a maximum
'number of child-births which every married couple can have without creating
a national problem regardin g the future of their offspring. There are reasons
to believe that this is possible; and that the number is three. Let us, therefore,

define 'improvident maternity' as a child.,.birth occurring to a mother who has already
given birth to three or more children, of whom at least one is alive. Let us also
define the ' incidence of improvident maternity' as the figure obtained by
expressing the number of births of this nature as a percentage of all births
occurring in any particular area during any particular period of time. A relatively

simple calculation shows that if we can put an end to improvident maternity as
thus defined, or at any rate reduce its incidence drastically, the excess of birlhs
over deaths will be reduced to negligible 1lUmhers and a substantially stationary
population achieved. As this conclusion is important, the relevant calculation
should be explained.
55. It has been estimated that the incidence of improvident maternity is,
at present, somewhere between 40 per cent and 45 per cent in our country. Out
of every 40 births which occur among every 1,000 people in the course of one
year, 17 births are of this naUlfe. Suppose we succeed in inducing the people
to avoid such births. Our national birth rate would then fall from 40 to 23.
Our national death rate is at present 27. Out of the 27 deaths which occur among
1,000 people in the course of one year there are II children under 5 years of
age, of whom 7 are infants who have not completed one year of age. A reduction in the number of births from 40 to 23"is likely, therefore, to be followed by
a reduction of these I I deaths to 6. In other words, avoidence of improviden~
maternity will not only reduce the national birth rate from 40 to 23* but it will
also reduce the national death rate from 27 to 22 at the same time. The net
result will be to reduce the rate of growth of population from about 13 per cent
per decade to about one per cent per decade. If improvident maternity is not
avoided altogether, but its incidence is very substantially reduced- to (say) 5 per
rent-, we shall still get a birth rate of 25 and a death rate of 23 and a growth
rate of only two per cent per decade. When that stage is reached, it is no
.Ealie't in this report (0/. Chapter 11. para 80). the view hal b(.cn exprcssed that such measures IS
Eaiiing the age" Of marriage will have only a very limited effect. and caDDot bring about large reduction
of the order indicated by these flgure •.

21 7

CHAPTER V:

THE PROSPECT-I9BI

doubt likely that further diminution of the death rate might be expected to
occur as a result of general improvement of health standards. We may
confidently expect this to be offset by further diminution of the birth rate.
This will happen because the people who have got rid of improvident
maternity will, ex hypothesi, have acquired effective control over child-bearing.
It will then be easy and natural for them to pass over from avoidance of
'improvidence' to positive 'prudence'. An increasingly large proportion of
mothers will limit themselves, of their own accord, to two children without
being urged to do so. Thus the fall in the birth rate may be expected to
keep pace with the fall in the death rate.
56. Let us, therefore, define our objective, not in the general terms already
mentioned in paragraph 53, but specifically in relation to improvident maternity. The task before the nation is first of all to bring about such a change in
the climate of public opinion that every married couple will accept it as their
duty (to themselves, to their family, and to that larger family- the nation) that
they should avoid improvident maternity. The occurrence of improvident
maternity should evoke social disapproval, as any other form of anti-social
self-indulgence. This is necessary ; but not enough. There should be standing
arrangements for ensuring that advice is given to every married couple on
the various ways open to them for discharging this duty and to make available the
necessary facilities. In order to regulate the scale and tempo of planned
measures designed to achieve this purpose, the following target should be fixed:
The i'ncidence of improvident maternity should he reduced from its present level of
0'lJeT 40 per cent to under 5 per cent within 1.5 years.
57. It will be noted that we are moving beyond the general statement that
it is desirable for mothers to limit the total number of births, to space births, and
so on. Approaching the subject from the point of view of national necessity, a
single common limit is suggested for all. Consistently with this approach it is
immaterial if, in a particular case, the pecuniary circumstances of the family or
the state of health of the mother are such that further maternity may be allowed
to occur and the offspring supported without much difficulty. Whether or not
the individual can afford it, the nation cannot- and hence it is 'improvident
maternity' all the same. While this must be made clear beyond doubt, it is also
necessary to point out that there is, in fact, no conflict in this matter between
the interests of the individual, of the family, and of the nation as a whole. No
elaborate argument is necessary in order to show that if improvident maternity
were universally avoided, no one will be unhappy or worse off. On the other
hand, mothers will live longer, healthier and happier liv~; and cbildreD will
2J8

IMPROVIDENT MATERNITY : REDUCTION TARGETS

be better fed, better looked after, and acquire an altogether better start in life
There will be an enormous reduction in the numbers of infants who die within
a year of their birth. If we can convert ourselves to the view that improvident
maternity is a form of anti-social self-indulgence which all of us should avoidand if we can equip ourselves with the knowledge and the material means of
avoiding it-, we shall have done more to reduce human suffering and promote
human happiness than by all other measures of economic and social planning
combined.
58. Let us suppose that the target for reduction of improvident maternity
is accepted; and consider how to set about the task of attaining it.
To begin with, we should be careful not to rush into the streets with
trumpets and drums in order to preach the new faith and count the converts.
There will be need for something of that kind- but in due time. The first
phase of the programme of measures must be devoted to thorough preparation. Out of the total of 15 years which are available to us for the
attainment of the target, the first phase would need at least three years from
the word "GO". It may take as long as five years. The preparation should
consist of two sets of measures, of which one may be described as the creation
of organisation and the other as the standardisation of teclmique.
Both are
equally important ; they should proceed, side by side.
59. What sort of organisation shall we need ? It is dear that it must
command the services of a sufficient number of workers, distributed over the
whole country, in such a way that they will have friendly personal access to all
mothers in the country, and effective opportunity to assist and advise them
No such organisation exists at present. Nor can one be created, whose function
is limited solely to the dissemination of birth control appliances and advice.
This function must, therefore, be performed as a subsidiary activity of an
organisation whose main function would embrace the whole field of maternity
and child welfare.
It is first of all necessary, therefore, that an adequate number of maternity
and child welfare centres should be set up and they should be so sited as to
establish practically complete coverage over all villages and towns. The centres
should be developed as agencies which render practical help to mothers before,
during, and after child-birth. Before they begin to advise the avoidance of
improvident maternity they should win friendship and trust by rendering service
which seem to save life and promote health and strength among mothers and
children. Does this mean then, that we are harking back to the view (dismissed a
short while ago as a fallacy) that it is impossible to make any progress in limiting

ZI9

CHAPTER V:

THE PROSPECT-I981

births until we have completed our development programme in other respects.

No. It is unnecessary to wait for the completion of the agricultural, indUstrial, ot'
other economic development programmes. It is not even neceSsary to wait for
the development of a full-fledged National Health Service. But it is necessary to

isolate that part of our health programme which relates to the provision of mater-.
nity and child welfare services; give it top priority (along with, say, irrigation and
ahead of all other development) and undertake accelerated development of these
services to the point at which the needed organisation is created.
60. How long will this take? Will it not be held up like many other health
am:i education schemes by lack of trained personnel. Obviously, the services
of tra:ned personnel will be needed- qualified midwives will be essential. But
the problem would be a manageable one if care is taken to locate, and fully
utilise) the services of all the 'dais' who are to be found in all parts of the country
- practising midwifery in its traditional form. It is possible, even probable,
ihat .these' humble women hold the key to the solution of the population problem.
They should be given simple training and instruction, advised and assisted by
duly qualified midwives and helped to perform their useful services bener than
they do at present. Those who render satisfactory service should be encouraged
by payment of a modest bonus, to supplement their professional earnings.
They should then be required, in return, to function in the villages as the agents
of the maternity and child welfare centres. If this is done and the number of
duly qualified midwives is increased rapidly and substantially, the staff requirements should be met. It is true that higher supervisory staff might be scarce
for a long time, but the shortage can be largely made good by making the fullest
use of the services of public-spirited social workers. This is, in any case, necessary in order to develop the usefulness of the services as quickly as possible~
All social workers who are willing to help should be effectively organised
(at the local level, the state level and the national level) and firmly linked
with appropriate governmental agencies at all three levels. Given the necessary determination and drive, as well as the funds, the personnel needed for the
work can be got together- at any rate over the greater part of the countrywithin five years.
.

6i. This will complete one part and, no doubt, the more difficult part of the
preparation which is necessary before a nation-wide campaign for' reduction
of improvident maternity can be launched. The second part is the one already
visualised by the Planning Commission and provided' for in the current Five Year
Plan. A Central Research and Information Unit should be set up, in. order to
.carry out the various items of work described by the Planning Commissiori.

m

IMPROVIDENT MATERNITY : REDUCTION TARGETS

In one sense, the activities of the Unit will have to be continued for an indefinite period- for there is scope for a great deal of research. But certain tasks
should be laid down as required to be completed within a specified time :
and Information Unit should be required to
recommend a few acceptable, efficient, harmless and economic methods
which are suitable for being sponsored by Government. It is perfectly
obvious that no one contraceptive appliance is likely to fulfil all the
criteria equally well. Therefore, harmlessness alone should be the
decisive test ; and cheapness the second most important consideration.
One at least, among the recommended methods, should be based entirely
on very cheap materials readily available in all parts of the country,
even if the appliance is not entirely efficient or acceptable to all people.

(i) The Centra] Research

(ii) This does not mean that methods of avoidance of undesired births
other than those involving- the use of contraceptive appliances are to be
ignored. On the contrary) they have an important part to play in achieving the national purpose, and it should be the duty of the Central
Research and Information Unit to formulate correct ideas and guidance
on the subject :
(a) The so called 'rhythm method' has received considerable publicity

recently. There is much difference of opinion about a somewhat
complicated version of this method, which is under investigation.
There is also a simpler version, according to which people are merely
advised to abstain from conjugal relations during the middle-third of
every menstrual cycle. It is not asserted that those who follow this
simple rule of what may be called 'conjugal temperance' can be
certain that conception will be avoided thereby. It is freely conceded
that the 'safe period' is a misnomer and might not always be safe.
But it is claimed that the observance of this simple rule is calculated
(in many cases though not all) to reduce the chances of conception
very substantially. If a large proportion of people living in a locality
observe the rule, it would be reflected in a material diminution of
the birth rate of that locality. Such a method will obviously be of
no use to persons to whom certainty of avoidance of pregnancy
is essential on grounds of health. It is also useless to persons who
have had three or more children already (in the context of national
policy envisaging the abolition of improvident maternity). But, if the
claim is verified to be correct, it may be very useful for married
couples to practise 'conjugal temperanc~' during the first decade
UI

CHAPTER V:

THE PROSPEcT-lgBr

or so of married life· before they have had three children. It should
be the duty of the Central Research and Infonnation Unit to formulate
clear guidance on this matter.
(b) Another non-appliance method of contraception which requires
consideration is 'coitus interruptus'. There is, at present, practical
unanimity (of a somewhat disconcerting nature) about this subject
among social workers engaged in the popUlarisation of birth control.
They dismiss it with a brief reference to neurasthenia. Doubts
about the wisdom of this attitude arise when one studies the
report on an "investigation carried out by the Council of the
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists into family
limitation and its influence on human fertility during the past
five years". A few extracts will be found in ApPENDIX VII. The
statistics collected during this investigation prove that "among a
group of couples married in 1935-39, all of whom had practised
some form of birth control between marriage and 1946, as many
as 44 per cent had never employed any kind of appliance contraceptives". Forty-four per cent is a very large proportion; and they
do not seem to have done so badly. The finding is that "pregnancy
rates during the practice of 'non-appliance'* birth control were
found to be about one-fifth higher than under appliance methods".
Other figures show that the proportion of people who successfully
limit their families in this way used to be still higher in the past.
The Commission finds that this is not due to ignorance of the
existence of more effective methods or a mere prejudice against
their usc. "It must not be assumed", the Commis~ion reports,
"that in the present state of birth control technique tllere may not
be a considerable number of people who positively prefer non·
appliance methods". Now, it is impossible to believe that people
would practise this method in such large numbers over a long time
if it was invariably calculated to make them nervous wrecks. There
are, no doubt, circumstances in which harmful results would follow.
But equally clearly there must be circumstances in which they
would not; otherwise the facts found by the Commission could not
exist. There is, at present, a complete absence of serious information on the subject. It is necessary that correct information should
be collected on this point. II is possible- to put il no higher*It is made clear in the repOrt that 'non-appliance methods' are to all intcpts and purpOiCi
synonym for coil'U8 'nteN'u.ptlM in the United Kingdom.

222

tMPROVIDENt MATERNITY : REDUCTION TARGETS

that a large proportion of people who are unable or unwilling to us~
appliance methods of contraception for one reason or other, might
yet succeed in avoiding improvident maternity by the practice of
'conjugal temperance' until three children are born and 'coitus
interruptus' thereafter. If this possibility can be confirmed by the
Central Research and Information Unit~ after careful study, the
resulting social gain would be enormous.
(c) Apart from methods developed in foreign countries, it is possible
that there are also some indigenous methods of a traditional nat.uie,
which are reasonably effective. There are references in old census
reports to the belief that the tea garden coolies of Assam have long
practised some effective method of contraception. This mayor
may not be the case now; but an effort should be made to locate
indigenous methods which may be locally well-known but not
generally talked about.
Cd) There is a good deal of ignorance over the whole subject of conjugal
relations. This is due, as the Royal Commission observes, "to the
furtive air that clings to the subject. Despite the efforts of
organisations and individuals, through books and pamphlets and
other educational means, to impart contraceptive knowledge in a
healthy context, many persons still acquire the intormation only
through dealers in pornography and from furtive talks". It should
be the duty of the Central Research and Information Unit
to cleanse the atmosphere and let in fresh air.

(iii) Apart from appliance methods and non-appliance methods of contraception, there is the method of sterilisation- especially of the male.
The technique is believed to be making good progress in recent years.
The claim IS made that the minor operation invloved is safe, effective
and free from any disabling effect both from the point of view of general
health and the continuance of normal conjugal relations. If this is true
and is brought home to the people, sterilisation of the male may become
an imponant part of the methods by which improvident maternity
is avoided. It is understood that the rapid expansion of facilities
needed for meeting a rapidly growing demand will not present any formidable difficulty. Provision of authoritative guidance on this subject
will be very valuable. *
·Paragraph 61 deals with 'f)ol~nlary resort to IIterilisation by people wbo wish to avoid improvident
m3to!rLity. It has nothing to do with the proposal that people suffering from certain types of dJlCaael
should be compulsarily stcrilil>Cd- a very different matter.

CHAP'l'd. V:

rm PttoSPEct-I98t

62. While these preparations regarding organisation and standardisation
of methods are proceeding, those agencies which are already working in this field
(mainly in cities) should be actively encouraged and assisted to develop their
activities. Experience and information which become available thereby should
be fully utilised by the Central Research and Information Unit. When the
preparations are completed and the responsible authorities are satisfied that
they are ready, the second phase should commence. A nation-wide campaign
should be launched for the elimination of improvident maternity from the life
of the people. The campaign should be explained to the people in villages,
as well as towns as a national movement designed to achieve a social reform
indispensable for assuring the safety of the nation and promoting the welfare
of its mothers and children. It will be essential for the success of this campaign
that it should be launched and directed by a national organisation of women
social workers, which should have actively helped earlier in the development
of maternity and child welfare services. The educative campaign should receive
political backing at the highest level. The elected representatives of the people
who are members of Village Panchayats, Municipal Councils and District
Boards should personally take active interest in the progress of the campaign
in their areas.
Once the mind of the people has been won, the rest will be easy. The
recommended practices will spread, and the advice and facilities provided
by the maternity and child welfare centres will be readily utilised. Progress achieved from year to year can be precisely measured by the statistics of
registration of births and deaths- which will become complete and accurate
as a result of the working of these services. The Central Government and
Parliament, the State Government and the State Legislature, Municipal Councils,
District Boards and Panchayats- all of them could review once every year at
what rate the incidence of improvident maternity was actually following among
the people commined to their charge. On the basis of such review they can take
special steps to stimulate effort in areas which were lagging behind. If we
set about the work in this way, we shall be able to secure- in about 15 yearsthat India has the lowest incidence of improvident maternity among all the
countries of the world. Why should we imagine that something which is
demonstrably good for mothers and children- and which the western peoples
have adopted without any help or encouragement from the State- would be
rejected by our people, even when they are helped and encouraged by the State ?
63· Obviously, all this will cost money. How much money will be needed ?
We cannot be sure about this, until we are nearing the end of the preparatory
224

tMPltOVIl)llNT l.tA'tEttNtrv : REDTJCtION TARGEt!

phase of the whole programme. But some idea, however tentative, is necessary
at least in order to get a dimensional picture. The subject was discussed in
this light by the present writer with Dr. T. LAKSHMINARAYANA, the Adviser
of the Planning Commission on Health Programmes. A tentative estimate
drawn up by him is included among the papers printed as ApPENDIX VII.
His conclusion is that the expenditure chargeable to public funds will be
approximately half-a-rupee per head of population, as the cost of providing maternity and child welfare services in the manner described. This will be the annual
recurring expenditure required when the services are fully developed ; the
. expenditure will be smaller during the preparatory phase when the service&
are being built up.
For a poor country with a large and growing population, half-a-rupee
per head is not a small sum; it is quite a lot of money. We have to face the fact.
We must consider the problem on the basis that the growth of population cannot
be checked unless there are maternity and child welfare services ; and we cannot
have such services unless we find the money for it. If the cost is fairly shared
between the Central Government, the State Government and the local body
concerned, it should not press unduly heavily on any of them.
64. We may now hark back to paragraph 46, where the crucial question
was formulated: If the effort to develop agricultural productivity with such
rapidity as to overcome present shortages and keep pace with unchecked growth
of population until 1981 is impracticable, is the effort to limit births and arrest
the growth of population any less impracticable? The answer, it is now suggested, is in the affirmative. It would be idle, in any case, to maintain that there
is any solution for our population-land-food problem which does not call for
difficult, costly and sustained effort over an extended period of a type for which
no precedent exists in history. We have already embarked on such effort.
What we have now got to do is to take stock of the entire problem, and not
merely the reflection of it over the limited period covered by one Five Y car
Plan or two. We should take a long-term decision envisaging the complete
solution of the problem. If we find, on a long-term view, that more than one
course is open to us, we should choose the one which is less difficult, less costly
and more likely to solve the problem permanently.
The general tenor of the conclusion to which we are led by the analysis
made in this chapter may be stated as below :
The effort to overcome present shortages and keep pace with unchecked
growth of population until 1981 involves the development of agricultural
productivity by 380 lakhs of ANNUAL tons.

CltAPtER V:

rFtE PROSPECT-I981

If the effort to develop agricultural productivity is combined with a
simultaneous effort to reduce the incidence of improvident maternity to
about five per cent, it will be sufficient to limit the development of
agricultural productivity to 240 lakhs of ANNUAL tons.
The former is unlikely to cost less than the latter or prove to be more
practicable. The latter offers a permanent solution of the problem, while
the former does not. The former opens up a prospect of indefinite
duration of hard labour without immediate results. The latter will be
rewarded by visible reduction of human suffering and promotion of
human happiness while the effort is still proceeding. The choice is
clear.

D - Conclusion
WE HA VB COME to the end of our attempt to project our mind some way
into the future and visualise the prospect for 198 I. We have seen clearly the
drift of the current on which we have been moving since 1921 and whither it
was taking us. We have taken note of the efforts now being made to steer the
ship of State in an altogether different direction and studied the chart of this
new course- the First Five Year Plan.
Let us summarise the broad
conclusion-

Firsl,- If we can be sure that food will be available to the people during
the next thirty years, at least as well as it has been during the last thirty
years, and if no popular movement in favour of limiting births develops
(as it has done among Western peoples), then the further course ofpopulation growth may be foreseen with confidence. Our number will grow
from about 36 crores in 1951, to about 41 crores in 1961, 46 crores in
1971 and 52 crores in 1981.
The growth will, indeed, be somewhat more rapid as ( in the
conditions assumed) the expectation of life will continue to increase.

Secondly.- The likelihood of the last figures being actually reached is,

however, small. The governing assumption- continued availability
of food supply at undiminished mtes of consumption along with unchecked
growth of population- is unlikely to hold good for as long as thirty years.
1~6

CONCLUSION

This conclusion is reached after taking full account of the tachooIoaical possibilities of development of agricultural productivity.

Thirdly,- The experience of I943 gives warning of the possibility that
growing food shortage might lead to a breakdown of the distribution of
food supply and thus open the way to a rcturn of those 'natural' checks
to population growth which were in operation during the thirty years
preceding ] 92 I .
This possibility, however, is unlikely to be permitted to materialise.
The system of planned 'state trading' in foodgrains, developed during
the last decade, is now well-established.
So long as we hold fast to it,
there is a guarantee that food shortage will be kept under control and prevented from developing into a breakdown of food supply. Sufficient
time will, therefore, be available for wise planning and efficient execution
of measures designed to overcome food shortage permanently.

Fourthly,- It is possible to overcome food shortage permanently, by taking
suitable measures over an extended period of about fifteen years.
For this purpose, development of agricultural productivity on an even
larger scale than that undertaken in the First Five Year Plan will be
necessary, but it will not be sufficient. Effective steps should be taken
concurrently to limit births to approximate parity with deaths and
thereby achieve a substantially stationary population.
Fz/rhl_v,- Births will get limited to approximate parity with deaths, if what
has been described as 'improvident maternity' is avoided by all or most
married couples. ['Improvident maternity' consists of all births occurring to mothers who have already had three or more children) when at
least one of them is alive.]

Sixlhly,- A combined approach to the solution of our problem calls for
the following targets :
(i) Increase of agricultural productivity from the present level of
approximately 700 lakhs of ANNUAL tons to about 940 lakhs of
ANNUAL tons.
(ii) Reduction of improvident maternity from over 40 per cent (its
incidence at present) to under 5 per cent.
If these two targets are accorded equal. priority and ranked higher
than all other development targets, they can be attained before population increases beyond 45 crores- our total number will then become
substantially statioI_lary round about 45 crores; and

CHAPTER V:

THE PROSPECT-IgBl

Sevemhly,- .The attainment of the target of reduction of improvident
maternity will necessitate the prior creation and permanent maintenance
of a nation-wide organisation of maternity and child welfare services.
This is difficult, but feasible and essential.
66. This report began with a citation from the CoNSTITUTION OF INDIA.
It is appropriate that it should end with another.
The CoNSTITIJTION enjoins that the
"State shall regard the raising 01 the level of nutrition and the
standard 01 living 01 its people and the improvement of public
'
d u t leB
. ........... . , ,
h eaIth as among I'stprimary
and that it shall
"direct its policy towards s«Clring that the citizens, men and
women equally, have the right to an adequate means 01 livelihood ".

Who are the STATE? They are
"the Government and Parliament 01 India, the Government
and the Legislature 01 each of the States, and all local or other
authorities within the territot'y 01 India or under the control
01 the Government of India".
This report, being a review of the life and livelihood of the people, has been
written with the conscious aim that it should be of practical assistance to the
STATE in the execution of this mandate of the people.
It is humbly sumbitted
accordingly, for the consideration of the STATE.

228"
GIPD-M-JI Censua Comnr.-u.ID-S3-6ooo.

Natural Regions, Sub-Regions and Divisions
1,

HIMALAYAN REGION
I' I

W,ster" Himalayan Sub.Regio,,_.
l ' I I Himalayan Uttar Pradesh division

l' 12 Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur diVision

l' 13 Himalayan Punjab division

3' 2 North c.ntral Hills and Plat'QII SNlt-Rqio""'_
3' 21 Uttar Pradesh Hills and Plateau division
3' 22 Vindhya Pl'IIdeah division
3' 23 Bhopal division
3' 24 North.West Madhya Pradesh division

1'14 Jammu and Kashmir division

I' 2 Eastern Himalayan Sub-RegionI' 21 Assam Plains division
1'22 Assam Hills division

3' 3 Nort/t.East Platwtl Sub-R.gion3' 31 Chhota Nagpur division
3' 32 Ea.'It Madhya Pradesh division
3' 33 Orissa Inland division

I' 23 Manipur di v i Si011
1'24 Tripura division
I' 25 Himalayan West Bengal division
I' 26 Sikkim division

2, NORTHERN PLAINS REGION
2' I Lower Gangetic Plains Sub-Region-

2' II West Bengal Plains division
2' 12 North Bihar Plain division
2' 13 South Bihar Plain division
2' 14 East Uttar Pradesh Plain division

3' 4 North Deccan Sub-Reg,'on-3' 41 South-West Madhya Pradesh division
3'42 North Hyderabad division
3'43 Bombay Deccan Northern division

3' 5 SOIIth Decca1l Sub-R~3' 51 South Hyderabad division
3' 52 Bombay Deccan Southern division
3' 53 Mysore division
3' 54 MadraB Deccan diviaion

:Z;2 Upper Gangetic Plains Sub-Regio,,_.
2' 2 I Central Uttar Pradesh Plain division
2' 22 West Uttar Pradesh Plain division

4, WESTERN GHATS AND COASTAL REGION
4' I Gujrat' Kathiwar Sub-Rsgion4' 1 I Bombay-Gu;rat division

2' 3 Trans.Gangetic Plains Sub-Region2' 31 Punjab Plain division

4' J2 Saurashtra division
4' 13 Kutch division

2' 32 Patiala & East Punjab States Union

division,
2' 33 Delhi division
2' 34 East Rajasthan Plain division
2' 35 Madhya Bharat Lowland division
2' 36 Ajmer division

2'4 The Desert Sub-Region-

2'41 Rajasthan Dry Area division

3, PENINSULAR HILLS AND PLATEAU
REGION

3' I Norlh--Wul Hills Sub-RIgion3' II Rajasthan Hills division
3' IZ Rajasthan Plateau division
3' 13 Madhya Bharat Plateau division
3'14 Madhya Bbarat Hills division

4'2 Malabar-Konkan Sub-Region4' 21 Greater Bombay divition
4' 22 Bombay~KOQkan division
4'23 West Madras division
4'24 Travancore-Cochin division,
4' 25 Coorg division

5, EASTERN GHATS AND COASTAL REGION
5' I North Madrcu and Orilla CQfUlIU Sub-RQionS' 11 Orissa Coastal diVision
5' I.l: North Madras division

5' 2 South Madras Sub-R.ti_
'i'2~ South Madras division

Population Zones, States, Natural Divisions and Districts
DistrictJ included

Zone/State/Natural dif..mon (u,ith cod, number)
North lDdla
UTTAR PRADESH
Himalayan Uttar Pradesh division

Garhwal, Tehri-Garhwal, Nainital. AImora. Debra Dun'
Gorakhpur, Baad, Gonda, Bahraich, Deoria, Benara.'
Jaunpur. Ghazipur, Ballia, Azamgarb.
Kanpur, Fatehpur. Allahabad. Lucknow, Unao. Rai2'21 Central Uttar Pradesh Plain division
Bareli, Sitapur. Hardoi," Fyzabad, Sultanpur, Prlltapgarb. Bars Banki
Saharanpur. Bareilly, Bijnor, Pilibhit. Rampur, Kheri'
2' 22 West Uttar Pradesh Plain division
Muzaffamagar, Meerut, Bulandshahr, Aligarh, Mathura.
Agra, Mainpuri, Etah, Budaun, Moradabad, Shahjahanpur, Etawab, Farukhabad.
3' 21 Uttar Pradesh Hilla & Plateau division Jhansi, Jalaun, Hamirpur, Banda. Mirzapur.

I'll

2' 14 East Uttar Pradesh Plain division

Ealt india

BIHAR
2' 12 North Bihar Plain division

Saran, Champaran, Muzafi'arpur, Darbhanga, Purnea
SaharBB, Monghyr North.
Patna, Gaya, Shahabad, Bhagalpur, Monghyr South.
• Hazaribagh, Ranchi, Dhanbad. Paiamau, Singhbhum.
Manbhurn, Santhal Pargana•.

2' 13 South Bihar Plain division

3' 31 Chhota Nagpur division

ORISSA
Mayurbhanj, Keonjhar, Dhenkanal, Sundergarh, Phulbani, Ganjam Plain, Sambalpur, Bolangir, Ralahandi.
Koraput.
• Balasore, Cuttack, Purl, Ganjam Agency.

3' 33 Orissa Inland division

5' 11 Orissa Coastal division

WEST BENGAL
I ' 25

2' 1 I

Himalayan West Bengal division
West Bengal Plain division

• Darjeeling, Jalpaiguri, Coach-Behar.
Hooghy, Howrah, 24 Parganas, Calcutta, BUrdwan, Birbhum, Bankura, Midnapur, Nadia, Murshidabad,
Maida, West Dinajpur.

Chandernagore

Chandemagore

ASSAM
l' 21

Assam Plains division

Cachar, Goal{)8f8, Kamrup, Danang, Nowgong, Sibsagar, Lakhimpur.
United Khasi and Jaintia Hilla, Naga Hills, Lushai Hills.
Guo Hills, United Mikir and North Cachar Hills,
Mishmi Hill., Abor Hills. Tirap Frontier Tract. Bali·
para Frontier Tract.

I ' 22 Assam Hills division

MANIPUR
I' 23

23 2

Manipur division

• Manipur.

•

Distn'ets included

ZaM/StGte/Nat1.lTQl division (with code number)
TRIPURA
J • 24 Tripura division

Tripura.

SIKKIM
I • 26 Sikkim division

Sikkim.

South Inella
MADRAS
3' 54 Madras Deccan division
4'23 West Madras division
S·I2. North Madras division
5' 21 South Madras division

Bellary, Anantapur, Cuddapah, KUrJlooJ.
Malabar, South Kanara, Nilgiris.
Srikakulam, Visakhapatnam, East Godavari, West Godavari, Krishna, Guntur, Nellore.
Chittoor, North Aroot, Salem, Coimbatore, Tiruchirapalll,
Madurai, Chingleput, Madras, South Arcot, Tanjore.
Ramanathapuram, Tirunelveli.

MYSORE
3' 53 Mysore division

Bangalore, Kolar, Tumkur, Mysore, Mandya, Chittaldrug, Hassan, Chickmaglur, Shimoga.

TRAVANCORE-COCHIN
4' 24 Travancore-Cochin division

Trivandrum, Quilon, Kottayarn, Trichur.

COORG
4' 2S Coorg division

.Coorg.

WeRt India
BOMBAY
3' 43 Bombay Deccan Northern division

3' 52 Bombay Deccan Southern division
4' I I Bombay-Gujrat division
4'2I
4'22

Greater Bomaby divison
Bombay-Konkan division

West Khandesh, East Khandesh, Danga, Naaik, Ahmed·
nagar, Poona, Satara North, Saws South, Kolhapur
Sholapur.
Bclgaum, Bijapur, Dharwar.
Banaskantha, Sabarkantha, Mahsana, Ahmedabad, Kaira,
Panch Mahals, Baroda, Broach, Surat, Amreli.
Gretar Bombay.
Thana, Kolaba, Ratnagiri, Kanara.

SAURASHTRA
4' 12 Saurashtra division

HaIar, Central Saul".1Shtra, Zalawad, Gohilwad, Sorath.

KUTCH
4' 13 Kutch division,

Kutch

Central India
MADHYA PRADESH
3'24 North-West Madhya Pradesh division.
3' 32 East Madhya Pradesh division

3'41 South-West Madhya Pradesh division.

Mandla, Sagar, Jabalpur, Hoshangabad, Nirnar, Betul,
Chhindwara:
Balaghat, Bhandara, Chanda, Raipur, Bilaspur, Dur"
Bastar, Rai garh , Surguja.
Amraoti, Buldana, Akola, Yeotmal, Wardha, Nagpur.

233

Districts included

Zone/State/Natural divisIon (with code number)
MADHYA EHARA'!'
2· 35 Madhya Bharat Lowland division

3· 13 Madhya Bharat Plateau division.

3· I4 Madhya Bharat Hills division

Bhind, Gird, Morena.
Shivpuri, Guna, Mandsaur, Ra;garh, Shajapur, Ujjain,
Ratlarn, Bhilsa, Indore, Dewas.
Dhar, Jhabua, Nirnar.

HYDERABAD
3.42 North Hyderabad division

3· 51 South Hyderabad division

Aurangabad, Parbhani, Nanded, Ridar, Rhir, Osmanabad
Hyderabad, Mahbubnagar, Raichur, GuJbarga, Adilabad, Nizamabad, Medak, Karim Nagar, Warangal,
Nalgonda.

BHOPAL
Sehure, Raisen.

3· 23 Bhupal division
VINDHYA PRADESH
3·22 Vindhya Pradesh divi~ion

Sidhi, Rewa, Satna, Shahdol, Daria, Chhatarpur, Tikam
garh, Panna.

North-West Indio
RAJASTHAN
2' 34

East Rajasthan Plain division

2'41

Rajasthan Dry Area I.hision

3' I I Rajasthan H ills division
3· 12 Rajsthan Plateau division

Jail?UT, Tonk, Sawai Madhopur, Bharatpur, Alwllro
Slkar, Bhilwara, Jhunihunu.
Ganganagar, Bikancr, Churu, Jodhpur, Barmer, Jalore.
Pali, Nagort:, Jaisalmer.
Udaipur, DUngarpur, 13answara, Sirohi.
Chittorgarh., Kotah, Bundi, Jhalawar.

PUNJAB
I· 13 Himalayan PUnjab Division
2' 31 Punjab Plain division

Kangra, Simla.
Ambala, Gurda.spur, Hoshiarpur, Amritsar, Jullundur,
Ludhiana, Fcrozcpur, Kamal, Hissar, Rohtak, Gurgaon.

PATIALA & EAST PUNJAB STATES UNION
2' 31

Patiala & East Punjab States Union.
division

Patiala, 13arnala, Bhatimla, Mohindcrgarh, Kapurthala,
,sangrur, Kohistan, Fatehgarh Sahib.

JAMMU & KASHMIR
1'14 Jammu & Kashmir dh'ision

Jammu, Kathua, Udhampur, Reasi, Mirpur, Chenani,
]agir, Poonch ]agir, Bararnulla, Anant Nag, Muzaffarabad, Ladakh, Astor!.!, Gilgit (Leased Area), Gilgit
(Agency).

AJMER
2·36 Ajmer division

Ajmer.

DELHI
2' 33

Delhi division

Deihi . ../

llIMACHAL PRADESH AND BILASPUR
1·12 Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur division

Bay Islands

234

Chumbn, Mandi, Sirmoor, Mahasu and Bilaspur.
Anduman and Nicobar Islands.

List of Agents in India from whom Government of India Publications are ava.ilable
AGRAModern Book, Depot, 4. Taj Road.
BngUsh Book Depot, Taj Road.
National Book House, Jeemandi,
Wadhwa & Co., Raja MandL
AHMEDABADChandra Kant Chiman Lal Vera, ·Gandhi Road.
Indradhanu Book House, Ltd.
Mission Road, Bhadra.
New Order Book Co., Bllis Bridge.
Han Har Book & Stationery Mart.
AJMERRajputana Book House.
AKOLABakshi, Mr. M. C.

Wheeler & Co., MIS. A. H. 249, Hornby Road,
Raj Kamal Publications Ltd., Bhartiya Vidya Bbawan Bldg.,
15, Cnowpathy Road.
CALCUTTA
Roy Chawdhuri & Co., 119 Ashutosh Mukherji Road,-2S.
Chatterjee & Co., 3. Bacha Ram Chatterjee Lane.
Chakervcrtty Chatterji & Co., Ltd.,
15, College Square.
Hindu Library, 69-A, Bala Ram_De Street,
Lahiri & Co., Ltd., MIS. S. K.
M. C. Sarkar & Sons Ltd., I4, Bankim Chatterji Street.
R. Cambray & Co., Ltd., Kant House., P 33, Miwon Road
Extension.
Roy Choudhury & Co., MIS M. M. 72, Harrison Road,
Sarkar & Sons Ltd., MIS. S. C. I/I/IC. College Square.
Thaekar, Spink & Co., (1933) Ltd.
Wheeler & Co., A. G. 18, Netaji Subhas Road.
Newman & Co.

ALLAHABADCentral Book Depot, 44, Johnston GUllj.
Kitabistan, 17-A, City Road.
Law Book Co., Post Box NO.4
Allert Road.
Ram Narayan Lal, I, Bank Road.
Supdt., Ptg., & Sty., U. P.
University Book Agency (of Lahore), Post Box No. 63.
Wheeler & Co., MIS A. H.
Universal Book Co.

CUTTACKPress Officer, Orissa Secretariat.
l'rabhat K. Mahaplltra. Chandni Chowk,
Manager, Cuttack Law Times ..

ALWARJaina General Stores, Bazaza Bazar.

DEHRA DUN-·
Jugal Kishore & Co..

AMBALA CANTT.English Book Depot.

DHANBADIsmat Co-operative Sotres Ltd.
Indian School of Mines & Applied ~Iogy Dhanbad (H.r.R.)
Delhi
Bawa HarkiRhan Das Bedi, 9-E,
Sadar Thana Road-6,
P. O. Box No. 2027.
Atma Ram & Sons, Publishers Etc. Kaslunerc Gate.
Bahari Brothers, 188, Lajpat Rai Market.
Federal Law Depot, Kashmere Gate.
General Book Depot, 538/39, Egerton Road, P. O. Box
No. 220.
Imperial Publishing Co., 3, Fail: Bazar, Darya Ganj.
Indian Army Book Depot, 3. Darya Ganj.
Jaina & Bros., MIS. J. M. Mori Gate.
Metropolitan Book Co., Delhi Gate.
N. C. Kansil & Co., Delhi Gate.
New Stationery House, Subzimandi.
Youngman & Co. (Rcgd.), Egerton Road.

AMRITSARSikh Publishing House Ltd., Court Road.
BANARASBanaras Book Corporation, University Rd. P. O. Lanka.
Students Friends, University Gate.
BAN GALORECurator, Govt. Book Depot.
Bangalore Book Centre, Subedar Chitram Rd.
Book Emporium, MIS S. S., IIR, Mount Joy Road,
Basavangudi, P. 0,
Vichra Sahitya Ltd., Balepet.
Standard Book Depot, Avenue Road.
StateR Business Syndicate, P. B. 10.
The Blngaiore Press, "Lake View", MysoT(, Rd.
P. O. Box NO.7, Bangalore 2.
BAREILLYNational Book Depot, Behari Pur.

CHANDAUSIMr. Madan Mohan.
COCHINSaraswat Corporation Ltd., Main Bazar Road.

ERNACULAMBharat Stores.
FBROZPOREEnglish Book Depot.

BARODAGood Companions.

GORAKHPURHalchal Sahitya Mandir.
BHAGALPURGlridih Popular Traders.
D:alers Welfare Syndicate, 13, Anant Ram Lane, Bhagalpur-z
(Bihar).
GWALIORJain & Bros. MIS. M. B. Sarafa Road.
BOMBAYGauhati Kitabghar" Assam.
Thacker & Co.
Charles Lambirt & Co., P. O. Box No. 4087.
HARDWARCo-operatOIl Book Depot. 9, Bakehouse Lane, Fort.
Sri Seva Kunj, Booksellers.
Current Book House, Hornby Road.
Sarallwati Sadan.
Dutt & Co., P. O. Box No. 6014. Para!.
Internlltionai Book House Ltd. Ash.-Lane, Mahatma GandhI HOSMIARPURRaid.
Universal Book Store, Bazar Valtilan.
lAkbaIIi Book Depot, BombaY-4.
HYDERABAD
(DBCCAN)National rnformation & Publications Ltd., National HoUle.
Hydetabad Book Depot.
New Book Co., Kitab Mabal, 188-190, Hornby Rd.
Swanf Book Depot, 1368, Lakri Ka Pul.
Popular Book Del?ot. L,mington Road.
JAIPUR CITY
Supdt. Gott. PrinUDg & Stationery, Queens Road.
Garg Book Co., Tripolia Bazar.
Taraporevia SOdS & Co•• MIS D. B.
MIDi Mandir, Sawai Manalngh Highway.
Trip@th1 & Co., MfS, N. ~ Princas Street.
Kalavadebi

Road.

Upper India PubUshina HOUle,

List of Agents in India from whom Govermnent of India Publications are available (comd).
JAMMU (TAWI)KrilbDl General Storefl, Raghunath Bazar.
JHANSIBhatia BoQk Depot, Sadar Bazar
English Book Depot.
JODHPURKitab Ghar, Sojati Gate,
Mr. Dwarkadas Rathi.
JULLUNDUR CITYJain General Houae.
Exceiaior Book Depot.
University Publiahers.
KANPURAdvaDi& Co., The Mall.
Sahltya Niketan
Universal Book Stall, The Mall.
KOLHAPUR
Maharashtra Gcantha Bhandar.

NEW DELHIAmrit Book Co., Cannaught Circus.
Bhotani & Sons, Cannaught Place.
Bodh Raj Marwah, Shop No. 65
Pusa Road, Market, Karol Bagh.
Empire Book Depot, 278, Aliganj, Lodhi Rd.
English Book StOle, G-Block, Qumaught Circus.
Jain Book Agency, Cannaught Place.
Suncja Book Centre, 24/80, Cannaught Circus.
Navyug Traders, Original Road, Karol Bagh.
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., Scindia House.
Ram Krishna & Sons (of Lahore) 13/13, Cannaught Place.
Saraswati Book Depot, IS, Lady Hardinge Road.
Sikh Publishing House Ltd., 7-C, Cannaught Place.
PATIALAJanco Booksellers etc: Bazar ~, Nashin.
PIrTNASohan Singh & Sons, Pirmobagi P. O. Kadm Kuan.
Sudpt. Govt. Printing, BibaE,
P. O. Gulzar Dagh

KUMTAS. V. Kamat, Booksellers Etc. Kumta N. K.
LUCKNOWBritish Book Depot, 8tHazrat Ganj.
J. Roy & Sons (India) td., Hazratganj.
Law Book Agency, z9-A, Kachery Road.
Universal Publishen, L~:l Plaza Bldg., Hazarat Ganj.

U_PPer India Publilhing t1OUfIe, Ltd.,

Literature Place, Aminuddaula Park.
Balkrishna Book HouMI.
LUDHYANALyall Book Depot.

POONADeccan Book Stall, Ferguson College Rd.
International Book Service.
Deccan Gymkhana.
Imperial Book Depot, 266, Main Street.
Raka Book Agency, Poona.
RAJKOTMohal Lal Dosabhai Shah.

RANCHIIdeal Book Store, Near Paristhan Theatre, Main Road.
MADRASDevine Trading Co., 22, Namasivaya.
ROORKEEMudaU Street, TripJicane.
Cambridge Book Depot.
Higginbothama.
K. Krishnamuthry, Mount Road.
Presidency Book Supplies, 8-C Pycrofts Road, Opp. Victoria SHILLONGHostlll, Triplicane.
Supdt. Assam Secretariat Press.
Supdt. Govt. Press, Mount Road.
SIMLAVaradacbary & Co., MIS P.
J. Roy & Sons (India) Ltd.,
Accounts Test Institute, P. O. Box, No. 760. Egmore.
Azad Kitab Mahal, Stall No. 13.
U. Shenoy & Sons, Car Street, Mangalore
Minerva Book Shop, The Mall.
C. Subhak Chitty & Co., Triplicane.
Sunder Dass & Sons, 141, Lower Bazar.
Govt. Ptg. & Sty. Punjab.
MASULIPATAMTriveni Publishers.
SIROHINational Trading Co.
MEERUT CITYPrakash Educations Stores, Near Tehsil.
SONIPATUniversity Book Depot, Near Tehsil.
United Book Agency.
Hind Chitta Press.
SURATMYSOREShree Gajanan Pustakalya, Tower Road.
J. Nanumal & Sons, Lansdowne Buildings.
TRICHINOPOLY
FORTM. Venkataramiah & Sons, Vedyanidhi.
Krishna Swami & Co., MIS S. S Teppaku.am.
Book Depot, Hundred Feet Road.
TRlVANDRUM.International Book House, Main Road
NAG INASupdt. Government Press.
Goyal Brothers, Booksellers Etc.
UJJAINNAGPURManakchand Book Depot, Patni Bazar.
Supdt., Govt. Printing Central Provinces
VELLOREWestern Book Depot.
. Vewtasubban, Mr. S. Law BookseUers.
VIJAYAWADANAINITALHindustan Diary Publishers. .
Consul Book Depot.

